EDLIZ 2020








8th Essential Medicines List and
Standard Treatment Guidelines For
Zimbabwe

EDLIZ2020






































PRINTED WITH FUNDING FROM GOVERNMENT of ZIMBABWE and PARTNERS

EDLIZ2020
EDLIZ 8" EDITION 2020

PUBLISHED BY:
The National Medicine and Therapeutics Policy Advisory Committee [NMTPAC]
Ministry of Health & Child Care Republic of Zimbabwe
Further copies may be obtained through the relevant Provincial Medical Directorate, City Health Directorate, the NMTPAC, Ministry of Health & Child Care (MOHCC), PO Box CY 1122, Causeway,  Harare, Zimbabwe, or the MOHCC website www.mohcc.gov.zw. Copies of the text may be obtained on soft copy  if required  for teaching  purposes  from  email  address: dps@mohccorg.zw  or  nmtpac2020@qmail.com.  EDLIZ  was prepared using Microsoft® Word.
The information presented in these guidelines conforms to current medical, nursing and pharmaceutical practice. It is provided in good faith. Whilst every effort was made to ensure that medicine doses are correct, no responsibility can be taken for errors and omissions.
EDLIZ Review Co-ordinator



No part of this publication may be reproduced by any process without the written permission of the copyright holder, exception being made for the purpose of private study, research, criticism or review, or for teaching, but not for sale or other commercial use.
Original Cover Design: Regina Gapa and Charon Lessing Cover redesign & Layout: Kim Hoppenworth
Cover redesign and layout 2020: Sable Press Pvt Ltd
© Copyright September 2020, Ministry of Health & Child Care








111

EOLIZ2020

EDLIZ REVIEW COMMITTEE



Apollo Tsitsi Bara Wilbert Borok Margaret
Chagonda Edward Chaibva Blessmore V Chapanga Lloyd Chidakwa Claitos Dube Masimba Gabaza Martvem Hove Ropafadzai Hussain Witness D. Mabaya Simbarashe Madzikwa Newman 8. Madziyire Mugove G Manangazira Portia
Matonhodze Petronella Maunganidze Aspect Mudzimu Forward Mujuru Hilda
Mushavi Angela Ndhlovu Chiratidzo E. Nyamayaro Raphael Rukwata Richard Sanyanga Arthur P. Sifeku Florah N. Torongo Mabel Vuragu Davison N. Wellington Maureen




















IV

EDLIZ2020
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all the individuals who made contributions through colleagues or discussion forums or by communicating through electronic mail. We are grateful to all who made this edition a national guide that serves as the standard for Zimbabwe. Thank you to all the healthcare workers for your support.
The following attended our review workshops as well as being instrumental in current chapter reviews:





Alex Stevenson Andrew Reid Anna M Nyakabau
Arthur Sanyanga P Ashley R. Verenga Auxilia Munemo Azza Mashumba Babra Moyo Bekezela Khabo Blessing Zamba
Caroline Mashingaidze Chido Rwafa
Chiedza Mupanguri Cynthia Tapera Davison Vuragu Dexter Tagwireyi Donald Mutangadura Elopy Sibanda
Elson T Mberi
Erasmus Hapanyengwi Erick Chiro
F Fitzgerald
Faith C. Muchemwa Felicty Gumbo Prof Felistus Chando Flora Matsikira Florence Chingwena Frances M Cowan Francis. J Ndowa
George Dhumbura Gerald Nyamutamba Gift. W Ngwende Gladys Marape Golden Fana
Gwen Chimhini Gwen Kandawsvika Hardwicke Matikiti Hildah Foromozo Jacqueline Ndebele Janet Usai
Jeneth Ndlovu Jeshuwa Maisiri Jocelyn Chaibva Jubilate Jonas Juliet Muponda Justice Mudavanhu
Kudakwashe Mhizha Kusum J Nathoo Prof Leolin Katsidzira Leonard Mushamiri Linda Chipendo Lomah Bhobho Lovemore Gwanzura Luckmore Bunu Luckmore Matsunge Marcia Mangiza Margaret V Mudzidzwa Mariana Magarira

V



Martin Odwel Marlven Gabaza
Marvellous Mhondoro Maureen Wellington Maxwell Rupfuts Mkhokheli Ngwenya Moline Mukoka Monica Miriam Mbawa Moses Macheka Mwatsveruka Munhutu Neivele Makaka Nhamo A Gonah Nisbert Mukumbi Nomsa Mahlanze Ntokozo Ndlovu Onismas Madzudzo Patience Kuona
Paul Matsvimbo Rangarirai Masanganise Ratidzo Hove
Richard Sabumba Rugare A. Kangwende
EOLIZ2020

Rumbi Oahwa Rutendo E Chirindo Ruth Rimai
Samson Chomunacho Shaun Ryan Zisengwe Shirley Chibonda Stanley Midzi
Stella Gaihai Stern Chisiyiwa
Tadiwanashe Musabayana Tanyaradzwa E Satande Tapfumanei Mashe Tellmore Rapozo
Tendai Nkomo Thandiwe Muchipi Tichaona Nyamundaya Tirivashoma Dube Venus Mushininga Victor Nyamandi Walter Mangezi Witness D Hussain


















Mrs R.F. Hove Director Pharmacy Services



Thank you!





VI
Prof. C. E. Ndhlovu NMTPAC Chairperson

EDLIZ2020

FOREWORD
It is our national objective that the health care needs of all Zimbabweans are met through the provision and proper use of essential medicines. Sometimes we do not need to give medicines, and this implies that, there is not always a "pill for every ill." Therefore, there is need to use medicines rationally, appropriately, efficiently and effectively.
The guidelines in EDLIZ have always reflected the consensus of local experts,  and thus take into consideration factors such as  the Zimbabwean setting, prevailing economic climate, practical experience as well as evidence-based therapeutics.

This new edition of EDLIZ has considered the dynamic changes in the Burden of Disease as reflected by the inclusion of updated antiretroviral medicines and treatment of other opportunistic infections other than Tuberculosis (TB), COVID-19 and antimicrobial resistance. Many of the therapeutic regimens of the previous edition of EDLIZ still hold true and remain the same and should reinforce the confidence of the prescriber in making reliable therapeutic choices.
I therefore urge all health workers to familiarise themselves with the revised guidelines, to prescribe within the bounds of this publication, and to recognise the critical importance of providing a quality service to all health care recipients through the rational use of medicines.

EDLIZ REMAINS good medicine! Use it.






















VII

EDLIZ2020

THE STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES & ESSENTIAL MEDICINES LIST FOR ZIMBABWE --EDLIZ 8TH
EDITION
This 8" essential medicines list and standard treatment guidelines for the most common health conditions in Zimbabwe has been endorsed by the National Medicine & Therapeutics Policy Advisory Committee [NMTPAC). It is the product of many years of combined efforts by hundreds of health workers at all levels of the health care system in Zimbabwe -- from the front-line primary health care providers to the providers of specialist care. It has been refined over the years as a result of its widespread use by our healthcare workers. We continue to revise the standard treatment guidelines and consider medicine developments and new healthcare problems.
The essential medicine list is based on the Essential Medicines Concept of the World Health Organisation. Medicines in EDLIZ are chosen to meet the health care needs of the majority of the population, and should therefore always be available and accessible at a price that both the patient and the nation can afford.
SELECTION OF MEDICINES FOR INCLUSION IN THE
ESSENTIAL MEDICINES LIST
Selection of medicines for inclusion in EDLIZ has been based on the following criteria, with special emphasis on proven evidence for their use in the Zimbabwean setting:


relevance to prevalent diseases proven efficacy and safety
adequate scientific data in a variety of settings
adequate quality
« favourable cost-benefit ratio
« desirable pharmacokinetics
! possibilities for local manufacture







VIII


Safe Efficacious Quality Available Affordable Accessible Rationally used

EDLIZ2020
"preferably available as single ingredient items and approved fixed dose combination (FOG) to improve adherence

Single ingredient items are preferred lo FDC lo reduce incidence of adverse medicine reactions (ADRs) and to monitor ADRs. However, FDC are useful lo reduce pill burden in the case of HIV/AIDS, TB, hypertension and diabetes.
GENERIC MEDICINES
Every medicine has a chemical name and a generic name. For example, paracetamol, its chemical name is N-(4-Hydroxyphenol) acetamide and the international non-proprietary name (INN) or generic name is paraoelamol. The INN is the medicine's official name regardless of who manufactures or markets it. An additional brand name is chosen by the manufacturer to facilitate recognition and association of the product with a particular manufacturer for marketing purposes.
For most common medicines there are several branded products that all contain the same active ingredient and therefore share the same INN. For example, the African Monthly Index of Medical Specialties (MIMS) lists over fifteen different brand names of paracetamol. There are 12 different preparations containing aspirin, 13 different brands of amoxicillin and 12 different brands of ampicillin.
The use of generic names for medicine procurement as well as prescribing  carries  considerations  of clarity,  quality,  and  price. Proponents of generic medicines procurement and prescribing point out that:
• generic names are more informative than brand names and facilitate purchasing of products from multiple suppliers, whether as brand-name or as generic products.
• generic medicines are generally cheaper than products sold by brand name; and this is demonstrated very clearly when it comes to antiretroviral medicines
• generic prescribing also facilitates product substitution, whenever appropriate.
Opponents argue that the quality of generic medicines are inferior lo that of brand (innovator) products. However, quality assurance and naming of medicines are completely separate issues. Generic medicines from reliable suppliers are as safe, effective, and high in quality as medicines with brand names. At the same time, branded medicines from a manufacturer with inadequate procedures for quality control can be of poor quality, despite the brand name. Also, although any medicine can be counterfeited, there are more



IX

EDLIZ2020
incentives for counterfeiting  brand-name medicines than generic medicines. Some pharmaceutical companies also sell their branded products under the generic name, for a much lower price.
Bioequivalence is often misused as an argument against the use of generic equivalents. For many medicines, the variation in bioavailability among individual patients is much larger than the variation among products of different manufacturers. In fact, bioavailability is clinically relevant for only a relatively small number of medicines such as furosemide, digoxin, levodopa, isoniazid, theophylline and phenytoin.
Zimbabwe has a well understood generic policy which requires that all prescribing is in the generic name and the dispenser can make generic substitutions (unless bioavailability is an issue, in which case the prescriber should indicate accordingly).

ADVANTAGES OF EDLIZ
The benefits of the selection and use of a limited number of essential medicines are:
@ Improved medicines supply @ More rational prescribing @ Lower costs
@ Improved patient use

IMPROVED MEDICINES SUPPLY
The regular supply of medicines is difficult in many countries, and the consequent health implications are many. Improved medicines availability should lead to improved clinical outcomes.
With fewer essential medicines    ,                   ,

being purchased, the mechanisms and logistics for procurement, storage & distribution will clearly be easier. II is not practical for every
clinic in Zimbabwe to attempt to procure, transport and warehouse all the hundreds of items in EDLIZ. Conversely, limiting the number of
procurement, storage & distribution
✓ lower holding stocks
✓ lower losses
✓ better quality assurance

medicines available at the primary health care level makes a regular supply of medicines more practical and possible.
With an improved supply the possibilities of holding lower quantities exist. This has financial implications as well as reducing the likelihood of medicines expiring or being damaged during storage.

X

EDLIZ2020

Quality assurance can be better managed when the number of medicines is limited, and quality checks can be performed more frequently.


MORE RATIONAL PRESCRIBING
In the absence of limited lists, the  large variety of products available  on  the   market contributes   to   inconsistent prescribing and  consequently, variation in clinical practice even within  the same  health  care facility. Irrational prescribing

✓ focused, more effective training
✓ more experience with fewer medicines
✓ no irrational treatment alternatives available
✓ focused medicine information
✓ better recognition of adverse medicine reactions
may lead to therapeutic hazards and increased costs.
When the number of medicines is limited, training can be more focused, and the quality of care enhanced. This is especially true when the list represents a consensus of opinion on first choice of treatment such as in EDLIZ.
Using EDLIZ enables the prescriber to become more familiar with the medicines they use, and better able to recognise adverse effects.
The use of EDLIZ also eliminates irrational products from being available for prescribing and allows for more focused medicine information to be provided on suitable essential medicines.


LOWER COSTS
Improved effectiveness and efficiency in patient treatment lead to lower health care costs. The essential medicines concept is increasingly being accepted as a universal tool to promote both quality of care and cost control.


✓ more competition
✓ lower prices
Essential medicines are usually available from multiple suppliers. With  increased  competition,  more  favourable  prices  can  be negotiated.
By limiting the number of different medicines that can be used to treat a particular clinical problem, larger quantities of the selected medicine will be needed, with potential opportunities to achieve economies of scale.



XI

EDLIZ2020
IMPROVED PATIENT USE


Focusing on fewer medicines can enhance patient education and efforts to promote the proper use of medicines in both patients and prescribers.
✓ focused education efforts
✓ better understanding &
increased adherence to
treatment
Additionally, with improved medicine availability changes to chronic medication regimens are less likely and as a consequence patient have a better understanding of their disease, their medication and the importance of adherence.

IMPLEMENTATION OF EOLIZ AND SETTING UP OF HOSPITAL MEDICINE AND THERAPEUTICS COMMITTEES (HMTCS)
The advantages presented here however do not just happen. EDLIZ itself will  not  ensure  rational  prescribing  or facilitate  good procurement or quality assurance. Educational, regulatory, financial or managerial strategies when implemented separately are less effective in promoting the rational use of medicines than combined strategies. The production of EDLIZ is one such regulatory strategy, but further steps such as training and re-training, patient education and the establishment and effective functioning of hospital medicine and therapeutic committees (HMTCs) have to be put in place to ensure cost-effective prescribing and patient care. It is therefore necessary for every hospital to have a forum where medicine use issues can be discussed. Ideally, a separate hospital medicine and therapeutics committee (HMTC) should be set up. Given the current manpower constraints, we encourage hospitals to exploit every opportunity such as the regular divisional meetings held in Central Hospitals to discuss and address medicine related problems. The NMTPAC is available to assist those hospitals that are ready to set up an HMTC. A technical guideline to set up a HMTC which was developed by the NMTPAC is available from the Directorate of Pharmacy Services.

EXPLANATIONS & CHANGES FROM THE PREVIOUS VERSION
This  edition  is  essentially  the  same  in  format,  layout  and categorisation of medicines as the last edition. You will need to read it carefully to note changes in recommendations that apply to your areas of interest.  Extra bulletins will be sent out where drastic changes in medicine recommendations have occurred.
All medicines in EDLIZ are categorised firstly by level of availability (ABCS) in the health care system, and secondly, according to priority
XII

EDLIZ2020

(VEN). Hence in the example below, amoxicillin is available at primary health care facility (C) level and is ranked vital (V).


Medicine
amoxicillin po
Codes Adult dose Frequency
C  V  500mg   3 times a day
Duration 7 days
LEVEL OF AVAILABILITY
C medicines are those required at primary health care level and should be available at all levels of care.
B medicines are found at district hospital level or secondary and higher levels of care. Some B medicines may be held at primary health care facilities on a named patient basis -- for example in the management and follow up of chronic illnesses.
A medicines are prescribed at provincial or central hospital levels. S medicines (specialist only) have been brought back into this edition. These are medicines that require special expertise and /or diagnostic tests before being prescribed.
VEN CLASSIFICATION
All medicines are also classified according to their priority. This is mostly a tool to assist in giving priority to medicines based on economic considerations. Thus, V medicines are vital, they are considered lifesaving or their unavailability would cause serious harm and efforts should always be aimed at making them 100% available. E medicines are essential and are given second priority. Without E medicines there would be major discomfort or irreversible harm. And N medicines are still necessary but are lower in priority than V and E medicines.
This edition of EDLIZ has been produced as a result of a highly consultative process and represents both the practical nature of the input from health care workers and the changing nature of medicine especially over the recent years. It has adopted an evidence-based approach  wherever possible and  has  balanced  this with  the resources available to the health care system.
The NMTPAC is a standing committee that reviews the therapeutic guidelines in EDLIZ on a continual basis, and always looks forward to feedback from the providers of health care in Zimbabwe. Contact the  NMTPAC  through  Directorate  of  Pharmacy  Services  on dps@mohcc.org.zw  or  nmtpac2020@gmail.com  with  your comments.


wCe   a  04C  a
n    5cry ire ad Cd Cr
etrtt
XIII

EOLIZ2020
MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS IN THE LATEST
EDLIZ

Preamble
The major changes in this latest edition of EDLIZ will be highlighted here so that you are aware of recommendations that you need to consider in your medicine management or supply issues. Ideally each hospital should create its own local medicine formulary which shows which medicines are considered very useful in that setting so that you do not have to order medicines that your doctors will not prescribe or use. For instance, you should not keep specialist medicines if there is  no  specialist  to  prescribe  them.  Hospital  Medicine  and Therapeutics Committees should select medicines from the EDLIZ for use in their hospital.
New chapter/Renaming of chapters
There is a new chapter in this edition on COVID-19 & there are new sub-topics included and renaming of some chapters as highlighted below:
Title in previous version   Title in new version
Guidelines on          Antimicrobial treatment
antimicrobial          and prophylaxis
treatment and prophylaxis
Antineoplastic agents     Systemic Therapy for cancer
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
-COVID-19


Hepatitis B and C treatment has been included in the chapter on Gastro-intestinal conditions.
Antibiotics
Tinidazole has been added to the treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
The first-line treatment for UTI has been changed to nitrofurantoin given the microbiological sensitivity patterns which were showing resistance to the fluoroquinolones. You should, as much as possible, try and get laboratory support for your antibiotic usage.

Immunisation
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccination has now become routinely available for girls at 10 and 11 years old. Typhoid Conjugate Vaccine
XIV

EDLIZ2020

(TCV) was approved for introduction into routine immunization in 2020.
There  are  discussions  on  how  to  introduce  routine  Td (tetanus/diphtheria) booster in the country and further information will be provided in due course.

ART Guidelines (use latest ART guidelines)
The recommended first-line HIV treatment includes the use of integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTl)-based ART i.e.dolutegravir (DTG) in adults/adolescents and raltegravir (RAL) in newborns. This is  due  to  increasing  prevalence  of  non-nucleoside  reverse transcriptase (NNRTI) resistance,  hence the transitioning from NNRTl-based ART, such as nevirapine (NVP) or efavirenz (EFV) to INSTls.
A shift from using age limits to using weight bands to determine ART formulations and dosing for children is needed.
• For children who weigh at least 25 kg, DTG-based regimens are now the preferred first-line ART.
•  For children and infants under 25 kg, lopinavir-ritonavir (LPV/r)- based  ART  is  the  recommended  first-line  treatment  until appropriate DTG dosing is defined for young children.
• For the newborn, RAL is now recommended as the preferredfirst- line treatment (instead of NVP-based ART) due to its ability to rapidly reduce viral load {VL). RAL is the only INSTI with approved dosing for infants and young children.
Third line antiretroviral medicines will be available in selected hospitals. Please familiarise yourself with the dosing of these new medicines and the algorithm for their use.

Tropical Diseases
You will need to familiarize yourself with the recognition and management of outbreaks; for example, Ebola which caused a huge epidemic in West Africa or COVID-19 which is causing havoc globally and has been termed a pandemic. Hence, our healthcare delivery centres are on the lookout for such infections. Get hold of the MOHCC comprehensive COVID-19 guidelines.

TB recommendations (use latest TB guidelines)
Until recently, six-month isoniazid therapy was the widely used regimen for TB preventive therapy (TPT) or isoniazid preventive treatment (IPT). New TPT guidelines include the use of combination therapies with isoniazid and a rifamycin as an alternative to 6 months
xv

EDLIZ2020

IPT. Use of a regimen including isoniazid (INH) and rifapentine (RPT)
- also known as the 3HP regimen - has been recommended for adults and for children >2 years of age; while rifampicin (RIF) and isoniazid for 3 months has been recommended for children <15 years of age (also known the 3RH regimen). You should familiarise yourself with the protocols.










































XVI

EOLIZ2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS


EDLIZ 8!' EDITION 2021 FOREWORD
111
VII
THE STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES & ESSENTIAL MEDICINES LIST FOR ZIMBABWE - EDLIZ 8TH EDITION              VIII

MAJOR HIGHLIGHTS IN THE LATEST EDLIZ TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS GUIDELINES
2. BASIC INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL MEASURES
3. SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME CORONAVIRUS-2:
€OVID-19
4. PAEDIATRIC CONDITIONS
4A. PAEDIATRIC HIV CONDITIONS
5. IMMUNISATION
6. OBSTETRIC AND GYNAECOLOGICAL CONDITIONS
7. SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
8. HIV RELATED DISEASE
9. ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY
10. USE OF ARVS FOR PREVENTION OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION OF HIV (PMTCT)
11. TUBERCULOSIS
12. TROPICAL DISEASES
13. MALARIA
14. RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS
15. CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
16. GASTROINTESTINAL CONDITIONS
17. RENAL TRACT CONDITIONS
18. RHEUMATOLOGICAL AND JOINT CONDITIONS
19. METABOLIC & ENDOCRINE CONDITIONS
20. NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
21. MENTAL HEALTH
22. COMMON EYE CONDITIONS
23. COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS








XVII
XIV XVII
1
8

15
26
76
85
91
115
131
151
132
175
179
193
210
227
240
256
271
280
286
301
313
327
341











EDLIZ2020
24. EAR NOSE AND THROAT DISORDERS                 345
25. SKIN CONDITIONS                              356
26. BURNS                                     366
27. PAIN MANAGEMENT & CARE OF THE TERMINALLY ILL       376
28. MEDICINES AND THE ELDERLY                      386
29. HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD PRODUCTS              390
JO. INTRAVENOUS FLUID REPLACEMENT                405
31. ANAPHYLAXIS                                413
32. POISONING                                  417
33. MEDICINES USED IN ANAESTHESIA                   436
34. SURGICAL CONDITIONS                          457
35. SYSTEMIC THERAPY FOR CANCER                   468
36. REPORTING ADVERSE MEDICINE REACTIONS            476
MEDICINE INTERACTIONS & INCOMPATIBILITIES            481
CATEGORISATION OF MEDICINES ON THE 8TH ESSENTIAL LIST FOR
ZIMBABWE                                    486

SPECIALIST ESSENTIAL MEDICINE LIST IN ZIMBABWE
INDEX BY MEDICINE NAME
504
512

EDLIZ2020
1. 1 ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS GUIDELINES

GENERAL GUIDELINES                           2
PRINCIPLES OF ANTIMICROBIAL USE                 2
NOTES ON SPECIFIC ANTIMICROBIALS                4
PYREXIA/FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN                 4
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS:                     6





































1

EDLIZ2020

GENERAL GUIDELINES

Antimicrobial medicines are the most over-used class of medicines worldwide including Zimbabwe. It has become a global concern that we are reaching the post-antibiotic era where common bacterial infections are no longer treatable with common antibiotics. Apart from the unnecessary cost and  risk to the patient, overuse encourages development of resistant organisms, a problem that has proven serious and expensive in many countries. In many cases anti- microbial  medicines  are  given  "blindly" or "empirically,  based  on  clinical suspicion without microbiological confirmation. Antimicrobials should be used only in patients with likely bacterial illness requiring systemic therapy. Positive identification of the pathogen and anti-microbial susceptibility testing should be sought wherever possible as this will result in improved and more cost-effective treatment outcome.


Principles of antimicrobial use
1.  Choice of agent should be based on factors such as spectrum of activity, anticipated efficacy, safety, previous clinical experience, cost, and potential for resistance. These are influenced by the severity of illness and whether the medicine is to be used for prophylaxis, empirical therapy or therapy directed by identification of one or more pathogens.
2.  Prophylactic therapy should be restricted to the use of a limited range of agents of proven efficacy in invasive procedures with a high risk of infection or where the consequences of infection are disastrous. Most surgical prophylaxis should be parenteral and commence just before the procedure, continuing for no more than one or two doses after the end of the operation. The aim is to achieve high plasma and tissue levels at the time that contamination would most likely occur i.e. during the operation.
3.   Empirical therapy should be based on local epidemiological data on potential  pathogens  and  their patterns  of antibiotic  susceptibility. Appropriate specimens for Gram stain, culture and sensitivity testing should  be  obtained  before  commencing  antimicrobial  therapy. Maintaining a database of susceptibility profile is useful as a guide for appropriate choice of empirical antibiotic therapy which is based on local, regional and national patterns.







2

EDLIZ2020
4.  Directed antimicrobial therapy for proven pathogens should include the most effective, least toxic, narrowest spectrum agent available. This practice  reduces the problems associated with  broad-spectrum therapy, that is, selection of resistant micro-organisms and super- infeclion.
5.  Choice of route of administration should be determined by the site and severity of infection. For mild to moderate infections the oral route is preferred, whilst the parenteral route should only be used for severe infections. It is also important that topical antimicrobial therapy be restricted to a few proven indications, for example, eye infections because of the capacity of most agents to select for resistant micro- organisms and to cause sensitisation.
6.  Antimicrobial combinations have few indications. These include:

• to extend the spectrum of cover, for example, in empirical therapy or in mixed infections,
• to achieve a more rapid and complete bactericidal effect, for example, in enterococcal endocardilis,
• to prevent the emergence of resistant micro-organisms, for example in the therapy of tuberculosis.
Note: Doses given are fora 70kg adult with normal hepatic and renal function. Paediatric doses are given in the chapter on Paediatric Conditions. In the elderly, as a general rule, doses given could be lower than the recommended adult dose (see Chapter on Medicines and the Elderly).
7. Access, Watch, Reserve Principles (AWaRe)

To  improve  the  quality  of  hospital  antibiotic  use,  the selection of antibiotics was guided by the WHO Essential Medicines  List Access,  Watch,  and  Reserve  (AWaRe) classification.

Access: Which indicates the antibiotic of choice for each of the 25 most common infections.  These antibiotics should  always  be  available,  affordable  and  quality assured.
Watch: Which includes most of the "highest-priority critically important antimicrobials" for human medicine and veterinary use. These antibiotics are recommended for specific and limited conditions
Reserve: Antibiotics that should only be used as a last resort when all other antibiotics have failed.


3

EDLIZ2020
Notes on Specific Antimicrobials
Some antibiotics are  becoming  ineffective  because  micro- organisms  are  resistant  to  them  hence  antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be sought where possible. Patients should be counselled to complete courses even when they feel better.
Oral  amoxicillin  should  be  used  in  preference  to  oral ampicillin because of its better absorption, efficacy and cost- effectiveness. However, the same is not true of the injectable preparations because they have similar efficacy.

Chloramphenlcol must be limited to serious infections such as, Klebsiella pneumonia, Haemophilus influenzae infections, difficult  to  treat  pelvic  inflammatory  disease  and  brain abscesses and not used indiscriminately in the treatment of fever. An exception to this is when there is need for a broad- spectrum antibiotic and it is unavailable. Furthermore, the oral preparation should be used judiciously as it is more prone to cause aplastic anaemia than the injectable formulation.

Dosage of  gentamicin,  streptomycin,  and  kanamycin (aminoglycosides) must be carefully adjusted for weight and renal function.  Careful  monitoring  of serum urea and/or creatinine and checking for complaints of auditory or vestibular symptoms (adverse effects) is necessary. An exception exists for duration less than 3 days use or when lower doses are used.

Patients  with  penicillin  allergy  (that  is,  a  pruritic  rash, angioedema,  or anaphylaxis)  must  not  be  given  penicillin. Rashes occurring after 48 hours are rarely due to allergy and are not a contraindication to further use. Note that, penicillins have  cross-reactivities  with  other  medicines  including cephalosporins  and  carbapenems.   In  such  instances macrolides are suitable alternatives. Patients with a history of co-trimoxazole  allergy  may  be  offered  desensitisation  (see Chapter on HIV related diseases.

Pyrexia/Fever of unknown Origin
In case of pyrexia/fever of unknown origin, which is a common presenting symptom for all ages, in adults there usually would be some localising signs or symptoms, which point to a likely focus of infection.
If after  careful  examination  no  clear focus  of  infection  is identified, the following should be considered in a previously healthy patient admitted from the community with fever of less than two weeks' duration:

4

EDLIZ2020

Viral infections (frequently resolve after 4-5 days, or may be the prodromal phase, for example, hepatitis) Malaria
Typhoid
Urinary tract infection Bacteraemia
HIV related causes of fever
If HIV infection is suspected see guidelines in the chapter on HIV Related Diseases.
If the patient's general condition is satisfactory, it is reasonable to  withhold  antibiotics  while  carrying  out  a  few  basic investigations: that is urinalysis (dip-stick), urine microscopy, haemoglobin, white cell count and differential and malarial parasites which are all within the capabilities of e.g. a district hospital laboratory. If possible, send a blood culture to the nearest microbiology diagnostic laboratory (NMRL and the TB laboratories). Liver function tests and urine testing for bile products are appropriate if hepatitis is suspected.  If no improvement occurs after 3-4 days, and there is still no identifiable focus of infection, and there is no evidence of malaria (at least two negative blood films), the subsequent management of the patient should be guided by further results of the investigations.
In those patients who present very ill or toxic, or whose condition deteriorates, antibiotic therapy should be initiated on the basis of clinical suspicion (typhoid -- ciprofloxacin ,
staphylococcal septicaemia - cloxacillin, etc, anaerobes -
metronidazole).
Recommended 'blind' therapy for septicaemia with no
identifiable source is as follows:



Medicine    Codes Adult dose  Frequency   Duration
ceftriaxone iv   CV   2g      twice a day  7-14
days
and  gentamicin iv  CV  4-5mg/kg  once a day  max 2 weeks


Alternative:
Medicine    Codes chloramphenicoliv  BV

Adult dose
1g

Frequency  Duration

4 times a  review
day

and   gentamicin iv   C  V


5
4-5mg once a day  max
/kg          2weeks

EDLIZ2020
The  use  of  antimicrobials  for  infection prophylaxis
There are some instances where the use of prophylactic antibiotics is well established. However, this often consumes a disproportionate amount of all antibiotics used in the hospital setting and consideration to their appropriate use must be given. Prophylactic antibiotic use must be within accepted principles and guidelines.

General Recommendations:
use the appropriate medicine (see below)
give as a single dose where possible
repeat when the procedure lasts longer than 3-4 hours
give intravenously 10-15 minutes before incision, or orally 1- 2 hours before incision.

Specific indications:

Surgical prophylaxis
NB: There is need for the recommendations to be guided by sensitivity patterns. It is important to establish a Healthcare Associated Infection Surveillance system for monitoring of sensitivity or resistance patterns.

Vaginal operations:


Medicine chloramphenicol iv
Caesarean section:
Medicine

ceftriaxone iv
Codes

B  V



Codes

C  V
Adult dose
1g



Adult dose
1g
Frequency single dose

Frequency single dose
Hysterectomy, or Colorectal surgery e.g. appendicectomy:


Medicine

ceftriaxone iv
Codes C  V
Adult dose 1g
Frequency single dose

and
gentamicin iv
C  V   4-5mg/kg   single dose





6

EDLIZ2020
If signs of infection after operation, give:


Medicine       Codes  Adult   Frequency dose
amoxicillin po     C  V  500mg  3 times
a day
and   metronidazole po   C  V 400mg  3 times a
day
Duration 7 days
7 days

Subacute bacterial endocarditis See Cardiovascular Chapter

For meningococcal meningitis contacts. Give as soon as diagnosis is made in the index case:


Medicine
ceftrlaxone Im
Codes
C  V
Adult dose 250mg
Frequency single dose
Duration


























7

EDLIZ2020
2. BASIC INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL MEASURES
GENERAL NOTES                               9
CATEGORIES OF INFECTION CONTROL PRACTICES         9
STANDARD PRECAUTIONS                         9
TRANSMISSION-BASED PRECAUTIONS                14






































8

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES
Transmission of infections in healthcare facilities can be prevented and controlled through the application of basic infection prevention and control practices. The 2 tiers or categories of infection control prevention and practices are standard precautions and transmission-based precautions. The goal of this two-tier/category system is to minimise the risk of infection, the spread of antimicrobial resistance and maximise safety level within our healthcare facilities.
These precautions should be embedded in a facility-based infection prevention and control programme (See National Infection Control Guidelines).
It is important to:
• Educate healthcare workers not only on what to do but why it is important to do it.
• Emphasize outcomes which helps healthcare workers to see how their routine duties interact with the infection control system.

Categories of Infection Control Practices:
a.  Standard Precautions (previously known as Universal Precautions) - must always be applied to all patients, regardless of diagnosis or infectious status.
b.  Transmission based precautions - are specific to modes of transmission and include airborne, droplet and contact precautions.

Standard Precautions
Treating all patients in the healthcare facility with the same basic level of "standard" precautions involves work practices that are essential to provide a high level of protection to patients, healthcare workers and visitors.
These precautions include the following:
•  Hand hygiene (hand washing, hand antisepsis)
•  Use of personal protective equipment when handling blood, excretions, and secretions.
•  Appropriate handling of patient care equipment and soiled linen.
•  Prevention of needle stick/sharp injuries.
•  Environmental cleaning and spills management.
•  Appropriate, safe handling ofwaste.

9

EDLIZ2020
Hand Hygiene

Appropriate hand hygiene can minimise micro-organisms acquired on the hands by contact with body fluids and contaminated surfaces.
Hand hygiene breaks the chain of infection transmission and reduces person to person transmission.

Hand hygiene is the simplest and most cost- effective way of preventing the transmission of infection and reducing the incidence of healthcare associated infections. It should be performed before and after touching a patient, before an aseptic procedure, after touching a patient's surroundings and body fluid exposure.

Types of Hand Hygiene

1. Hand washing is usually limited to hands and wrists, the hands are washed for a period of 20-30 seconds with hand washing soap and water.
2. Hand antisepsis/Decontamination

• Decontaminate hands with a waterless alcohol-based hand gel or rub for 40-60 seconds. This is appropriate for hands that are not visibly soiled.
3. Surgical hand antisepsis

• This removes or destroys transient micro-organisms and confers a prolonged effect. The hands and forearms are washed thoroughly with an antiseptic soap for a period of 2-3 minutes and dried with a sterile towel. This is required before performing invasive procedures.
NB: Hands should be dried with single use towels or disposable paper towels.

Use of Personal Protective Equipment. Types:
•  Scrub Suit or Gowns
•  Plastic Aprons
•  Boots or shoes covers
•  Caps
•  Protective eye wear
•  Gloves
> Gloves reduce the incidence of hand contamination with infectious material which in tum reduces the opportunity for personnel to become


10

EDLIZ2020
infected and/or the organisms to spread to other personnel and /or patients.

> Gloves should not replace hand hygiene

Gloves are to be worn when touching the following:
•  Blood
•  All body fluids
•  All body secretions
•  All body excretions

Gloves should be removed before touching clean items (e.g. phone, door knobs or patients' charts.) Perform hand hygiene after removing gloves.

Important points to remember when using:

a) Gloves.

•   Use gloves when there is potential exposure to blood, body fluids, excretions, or secretions.

•  Change gloves between patients, between procedures on the same patient when they become soiled.
•   Remove  gloves  before  leaving  the  patient's  bedside  and decontaminate hands immediately with 70% alcohol hand rub solution.
•  Discard gloves after attending to each patient.

b) Boots/shoe covers

•  These are used to protect the wearer from splashes of blood, body fluids, secretions, and excretions.
•  Shoe covers should be disposable and waterproof.

•  Waterproof boots should be washable.

c) Caps

•   Disposable and waterproof caps that completely cover the hair are used when splashes of blood and body fluids are expected.






11

EDLIZ2020

d) Masks and Respirators

•   A  surgical  mask  protects  healthcare  providers  from  inhaling respiratory pathogens transmitted by the droplet routes. It prevents the spread of infectious diseases such as COVID-19, influenza and meningococcal diseases (meningococcal meningitis.)
•   A  N95  respirator protects  healthcare  providers from  inhaling respiratory pathogens that are transmitted via the airborne route. This helps to prevent the spread of infectious diseases such as TB, or MOR-TB, chicken pox (varicella), measles or rubella.
NB: In order to prevent the spread of infection, the appropriate mask/respirator should be worn by healthcare providers and visitors when attending to a patient suffering from a communicable disease that is spread via the airborne or droplet route.

The patient with a communicable disease via the droplet or airborne route should wear a surgical mask when being transferred to other departments or hospitals or in an isolation room to prevent spread of infection.
Disposable masks are for single use only and should be discarded after use.

Precautions

• Masks/Respirators should not be worn around the neck
• Masks/Respirators cannot be worn with beards or unshaven faces.
• Respirators should be "fit-tested" to ensure maximum protection or at least "fit-checked" before use to ensure complete seal to ensure effective filtering of micro-organisms.
e) Gowns

•  Gowns made of impervious material are worn to protect the wearer's clothing/uniform from possible contamination with micro-organisms and exposure to blood, body fluids, secretions and excretions.
•  Use gown once for one patient and discard.

•  Healthcare workers should remove gowns before leaving the unit.
Recommendations for use of gowns
•  Lab coats or scrub suits should not be viewed as an effective barrier to blood or other body fluids.
•   Use of fluid resistant gowns, impervious gowns or plastic aprons, is highly recommended where soiling of clothes with blood or other potentially infectious material will likely occur.
12

EDLIZ2020

f) Plastic Aprons

•   A plastic apron protects the wearers' unifonn from contact with contaminated body fluids.

•   The inside of the apron is considered clean, the outside is considered contaminated. The neck of the apron is clean because that part is not touched with contaminated hands.
•  Wash hands thoroughly after removing apron.

g) Protective eyewear/Goggles

•   Should always be worn during patient contact where there is a possibility that patients' body fluids may splash or spray onto the care giver's face/eyes (e.g. during suctioning, intubation, endoscopy and cleaning of instruments used for these procedures)
•  During all dental, surgical, laboratory and post-mortem procedures.

•   Full face shields may also be used to protect the eyes and mouth of the healthcare worker in high risk situations.

•  Re-usable goggles should be washed and decontaminated after removal and in-between use.
Please note: All protective equipment should be removed prior to leaving work area.

h) Needles, sharp instruments and other devices.

All equipment contaminated with blood or other body fluids should be handled with special care. Keep in mind these recommendations:

•  Never recap needles
•  Never bend or break needles
•  Never remove needles from disposable syringes
•  Immediately dispose of all disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades and other sharp instruments, after use, in a labelled leak- proofpuncture resistant container.
•   Never over-fill the container. Seal and dispose when ¾ full

Transmission-based precautions.
These are designed to supplement standard precautions or protocols and must always be used in conjunction with Standard Precautions isolation techniques.


13

EDLIZ2020

Transmission based precautions provide extra safety by facilitating a concerted effort to control the spread of specific types of bacteria. Whilst mostly used for diagnosed infection, they are useful when a specific diagnosis is suspected. Transmission-based precautions are divided into 3 basic categories:

•  Contact
•  Droplet
•  Airborne
Contact Precautions:

•   Reduces the risk of transmission of organisms from infected or colonised patient through direct or indirect contact.(e.g. Herpes Simplex, Haemorrhagic Fever Virus e.g. Ebola, multi-drug resistant bacteria)
•   Precautions  include:  Hand  gloving/Patient  placement  /Hand washing/Use of aprons and gowns/Patient care equipment/Patient transport.
Droplet Precautions:

•  Reduces the risk of nosocomial transmission of pathogens spread by large droplets particles usually within a metre (e.g.  Mumps, Diphtheria, Haemophilus, Influenza and SARS-CoV-2.)
•  Droplets may be expelled during: Sneezing/CoughinglTalking
•  Teach cough hygiene i.e. cover mouth when coughing
•   Precautions include: Patient placement/Respiratory protection
/Patient transportation
Airborne Precautions:

•  Designed to provide protection from infectious aerosols which may be suspended in the air for an extended period of time.

•   Used in addition to Standard Precautions for patients known or suspected to be infected with micro-organisms transmitted by airborne route e.g. TB, chicken pox, measles.
•  Precautions include: Respiratory protectionlPatient placement/Patient transportation




14

EDLIZ2020

3. SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME   CORONAVIRUS-2: cOVID-19
GENERAL NOTE                            16
TESTING FOR COVID -19                       17
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL           18
HANDLING OF CONTACTS OF COVID               20
MANAGING A CASE                         22
POST DISCHARGE                          25
RECOMMENDED ANTIVIRAL INTERVENTION          25


































15

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTE
What is COVID-19?
Coronaviruses are responsible for the simple colds that we know about but COVID-19 is a viral infection due to the new/novelcorona virus that was identified in China in December 2019. This new coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is easily transmitted from person to person and those not exhibiting symptoms can transmit it too, unlike SARS/MERS where transmission appeared to be via those already exhibiting symptoms.

We expect that 80% of those who get infected will be able to take care of themselves at home. However, 20% will need to be admitted as they will have moderate /severe symptoms of COVID-19. We also expect that 5% of the total that will be infected will need ventilation in an intensive care setting.

Given our limited capacity to handle infected cases in our hospitals all over Zimbabwe, it is important that we avoid getting infected. Hence, we need to observe the current public health measures and practice infection prevention and control to the highest extent possible.
What is the incubation period?

The incubation period appears to be about 14 days in most cases but most symptoms will appear at about day 5 of infection. Hence, WHO recommends that contacts of patients with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 be quarantined for 14 days from the last time they were exposed to the patient.
What is self-quarantine and self-isolation?

Self-quarantine refers to when you distance yourself from others after exposure or potential exposure just in case you may develop symptoms of
€OVID-19.

Self-isolation refers to those with symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 and therefore need to assume they are infected even if not yet tested so as to protect others around them. This will also apply to confirmed COVID-19 cases with mild symptoms and being managed at home i.e. not deemed sick enough to be admitted.


What are the symptoms?

The case definition is changing all the time but in general a new fever, dry cough, myalgia, shortness of breath and extreme fatigue warrant an exclusion of COVID-19. Thus, anyone presenting with flu-like symptoms should be



16

EDLIZ2020
assumed to be a potential COVD-19 case until proved otherwise. Children may also have poor feeding, nausea and vomiting.

TESTING FOR COVID-19

The testing is still limited. But the definitive test is a RT-PCR testing of nasopharyngeal swabs for most patients. The results have a turnaround time of about 6 hours. Point of care tests are likely to be available soon.
Definitions of COVID-19 cases and contacts are as per the World Health Organisation guidelines which are updated periodically. They are depicted in the table below:

Suspect cases     A. A patient with acute respiratory illness (fever and meet one ofthe       at least one sign/symptom of respiratory following          disease, e.g., cough, shortness of breath),
criteria           AND a history of travel to or residence in a location reporting community transmission of COVID-19 disease during the 14 days prior to symptom onset
B. A patient with any acute respiratory illness AND having been in contact with a confirmed or probable COVID-19 case (see definition of contact) in the last 14 days prior to symptom onset
C. A patient with severe acute respiratory illness (fever and at least one sign/symptom of respiratory disease, e.g., cough, shortness of breath; AND requiring hospitalization) AND in the absence of an alternative diagnosis that fully explains the clinical presentation.

A   probable    A.  A suspect case for whom testing for the
case    has       COVID-19 virus is inconclusive
either one of
the following     B.  A suspect case for whom testing could not be
performed for any reason

Confirmed    A person with laboratory confirmation of COVID-19
case      infection, irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms.





The following patients should be considered at high risk of dying if they


17

EDLIZ2020
have COVID-19 symptoms and should be considered for admission:
•  Patients older than 60 years,
•  Patients with underlying medical conditions {chronic lung disease, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, HIV infection)
•  Pregnant women.

Healthy individuals with mild illness do not need to be tested but should stay at home and where possible isolate themselves even from household contacts to prevent spread of infection.
·COVID-19 HOTLINE -Call 2019

INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL (IPC)

A COVID-19 IPC response plan should be embedded in the overall facility IPC policy and plan. In COVID-19, the hierarchy or control measures are:
1.  Administrative -- Policies and SOPs to enable early assessments and triaging or cases (including spatial distancing); early recognition and reporting or cases, adequate staffing levels, and implementation or the two-tier control measures (Standard and Transmission based precautions)
2.  Engineering controls -- including ventilation, isolation facilities with
dedicated ablution facilities, restricting access, signage for contact and droplet precautions, provide hand hygiene stations (with soap and water or sanitizers) at health facilities and mobilize clients and staff to use them
3.  Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)-availability of appropriate and
adequate PPE at all settings to prevent transmission of SARS- Co2 to staff and other patients (refer to latest COVID-19 PPE Policy)
The following measures should be strictly observed in order to prevent transmission of SARS-Cov-2:
►  Perform hand hygiene frequently with an alcohol-based hand rub (60
-80% alcohol content) or wash hands with soap and water if hands are visibly soiled. Avoid touching your face, mouth, nose and eyes with dirty hands. Also avoid hand shaking. To effectively clean hands, rub the hands for at least 20 seconds using the recommended steps (refer to the latest National IPC Guidelines on the 5 moments and the technique for hand hygiene).




18

EDLIZ2020
»  Staff who develop symptoms should self-quarantine until they are cleared of COVID-19 and are feeling better. Teach cough etiquette and provide IEC materials as a reminder for staff and patients.
» When caring for patients or working in areas providing care to suspected and confirmed cases of COVID-19, wear PPE as recommended in the PPE Policy for COVID-19. Training in the proper donning and doffing of PPE should be given.
»  Increase the frequency of environmental cleaning and provide appropriate cleaning agents and disinfectants, which are active against enveloped viruses. Segregate linen, without shaking, according to the National IPC Guidelines. Wet linen should be placed in impervious bags before putting in laundry bags. II is crucial to train laundry workers on linen management and provide appropriate PPE.
» Manage waste as per National IPC Guidelines. Waste segregation at point of care (using colour coded bins and job aides), provision of PPE for waste handlers and timely disposal of the waste. Note waste from COVID-19 care areas is highly infectious and should not be kept in the facility waste holding area.
» It is critical that we apply infection prevention and control and avoid catching COVID-19 as there is no specific therapy for this infection right now apart from supportive care.

In summary:

Wash hands with soap and water as often as possible for at least 20 seconds. If you have no access to water, use hand sanitizer ideally one with 60-80% alcohol.
Given that we will not know who is infected and who is not, healthcare workers (HCW) will need to use appropriate PPE in the hospital setting in particular at Emergency Rooms and when caring for a person with COVID-19.
HCW must be trained in the donning and doffing of this PPE and its correct disposal.
We need to identify dedicated isolation centers/hospitals for COVID-19 treatment.


What is social distancing?

•  We suggest that people keep a distance of at least 1 metre from each other so that if one coughs or sneezes, there is less likelihood of inhaling the droplets that might have the virus.


19

EDLIZ2020
•  Limit getting out of your home for social visits. Limit being in gatherings such as funerals, church services and adhere to the messages as provided by our government.

HANDLING OF CONTACTS of COVID-19
Self- Quarantine - for all persons with history of exposure to COVID-19 who had a close contact with an infected person or have had limited contact with an infected person for a short period of time including travel outside the country or exposure to a case of COVID-19. Those who feel sick should also stay home and self-quarantine even if symptoms seem mild.
Self-isolation for all persons with symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 to prevent the spread of the virus, including those within your home. Those who are sick should be separated from others in their home to the greatest extent possible.


How to handle a suspected case of COVID-19:

TRIAGE:
•  Early recognition of suspected COVID-19 cases.
•  Suspected COVID-19 need to be quickly identified when they present to our healthcare settings/hospitals.
•  Screen at arrival in hospital and refer appropriately. If you suspect COVID-
19 refer to the nearest isolation centre for testing and avoid admitting patients to centres that may not be able to handle the case or risk infecting non-COVID cases.
•   If you suspect a patient has Covid-19 symptoms, put a mask on them and isolate them in a separate room whilst waiting for the rapid response team to come and collect the patient to take them to the Isolation Centre or to the appropriate place for their admission. Keep the patient at least 3 meters from other suspect cases.
•  If possible, use dedicated or disposable patient-care equipment.
•  Clean and disinfect reused equipment before use on another patient.
•  Keep a record of all patients who have had to be isolated at your unit and follow up their result. This is important for contact tracing should their test result be positive, especially the healthcare workers at that facility.(Use appropriate surveillance tools for COVID-19)
•   If the healthcare workers who looked after such a patient were not wearing appropriate PPE, they should be isolated from work until the disposition of that case is known (COVID-19 positive or negative), for up to 14 -21 days.
•  Patients with mild symptoms can be sent back home for self-quarantining for at least 14 -21 days. When they are at home, they will need to stay in their own room and avoid infecting their family members. Ideally, they should be in their own room, use their own utensils i.e. not share these

20

EDLIZ2020
with other members of the family, use their own toilet/bathroom or use these facilities after every one else has used them. Their waste will need to be handled as infectious and disposed of safely.
•   Those with underlying chronic disease like HIV, diabetes mellitus, chronic lung disease, chronic heart failure, cancer, older individuals, are at risk of developing moderate/severe infection.
o  Therefore, they need to be admitted
o  Check if they have a respiratory rate > 24, tachycardia
>120, 0 saturation <90%


Where to refer to:
You will need to know where to refer patients for admission from your site. Whom to contact:
Keep the numbers of the local/focal person that you need to contact if you
suspect COVID-19.

CARE OF SUSPECTED CASE WITH MILD SYMPTOMS WHO IS BEING SENT BACK HOME:
•  practice social distancing- keep at least 2 meters away from other people
•  practice infection prevention and control (IPC} e.g. washing hands frequently or using hand sanitizers, cough etiquette
•  avoid elderly people as they are at risk of getting severe disease
•  stay at home to limit exposing their infection to others or picking up COVID-19 just in case their illness is just a simple Hu/other infection.

Presenting symptoms and signs:

•  Suspect Covid-19 when a person presents with a fever, dry cough and shortness of breath. They may also have fatigue, muscle aching, diarrhea and /or vomiting.
•  Having a runny nose is not that common in Covid-19.
•  Thus, the symptoms of this COVID-19 are likely to be confused with our usual flu-like syndromes.
•  Be wary of those who may have travelled from countries reporting a lot of COVID-19 cases which is now declared a pandemic by WHO as most countries have cases including Zimbabwe.
•  Any person presenting with a severe acute respiratory tract infection is a potential COVID-19 case and in particular those with a nu-like illness with a fever, dry cough and shortness of breath.

21

EDLIZ2020
•  Any case of pneumonia should be considered as a potential COVID-
19 case and have that possibility excluded through checking for risk factors i.e. have they travelled, have they been exposed to a COVID- 19 case etc.

Who should be admitted?

•  Assess the patient.
•  If mild symptoms can go home
•   If having difficulty breathing, 02 saturation <90, arrange for admission,
•   Make sure that you have excluded other possible causes of fever and shortness of breath e.g.  PCP, malaria, bacterial  pneumonia, pulmonary embolism etc.

MANAGING THE CASE:
•   Treat as we would normally do for a case of pneumonia as per EDLIZ guidelines
•   Give empiric antibiotics to treat all likely pathogens causing pneumonia e.g. in most patients unless they have documented allergies give:
Ceftriaxone 2g  iv start followed  by 1 g bd iv x 1/52 & Azithromycin 500mg od po on day 1 and then 250mg daily x 4 days
•   For children -use Ceftriaxone 50-80mg/kg plus Azithromycin 1 0mg/kg
•  Paracetamol 500mg -1gm every 6-8 hours as required for fever
•  Give patient a surgical mask if you suspect COVID-19. Wear PPE yourself.
•   Give supplemental oxygen therapy immediately to patients with respiratory distress, hypoxaemia, or shock,
•   Avoid overloading the patient with intravenous fluids. Patients should be treated cautiously with intravenous fluids, because aggressive fluid resuscitation may worsen oxygenation, especially in settings where there is limited availability of mechanical ventilation,
•  0@ 5L/min - SpO2 290% in non-pregnant & SpO, 292-95 % in pregnant patients,
•  Dexamethasone 6mg iv or orally or use Prednisolone 40 mg daily
•  Avoid rapid infusion of fluids
o  aim for maintenance fluids unless if there is evidence of septic shock or obvious dehydration.
o  Rapid IV fluid infusions may accelerate the respiratory decompensation in those with pneumonia and/or ARDS and


22

EDLIZ2020

•  Conduct a portable Chest X-ray which may show ground glass appearance, especially in the peripheral areas.

LABORATORY TESTING OF PATIENT:

•  Conduct usual basic blood tests e.g. FBC, U&E, glucose, LFT
•  Collect blood cultures for bacteria that cause pneumonia and sepsis, ideally before antimicrobial therapy.
•   DO NOT delay antimicrobial therapy just to collect blood
cultures.

MANAGEMENT OF HYPOXEMIC RESPIRATORY FAILURE AND ARDS
•  Recognize severe hypoxemic respiratory failure when a patient with respiratory distress is failing standard oxygen therapy.
•  High-flow nasal oxygen (HFNO) or non-invasive ventilation (NIV) should only be used in selected patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure. These modes of ventilation require negative ventilation in the ICU because they increase aerosolization and risk to HCW. We recommend CPAP is delivered in negative pressure room with air exchanges greater than regulatory thresholds (10cycles per hour) if negative pressure room is not available, a neutral pressure room with air cycling is preferable.
•  Endotracheal intubation should be performed by a trained and experienced provider using airborne precautions.
•  Implement mechanical ventilation using lung protective approach lower tidal volumes (4-8 ml/kg predicted body weight, PBW) and lower inspiratory pressures (plateau pressure <30 cmH20). Target SP088-95%, pH >7.25 and permissive hypercapnia PaCO.
•  In patients with severe ARDS, prone ventilation for >12 hours per day is recommended.
•  Use a conservative fluid management strategy for ARDS patients without tissue hypoperfusion.
•  Be extra careful when providing rehabilitation (e.g. chest physiotherapy etc) care to these patients


Management of septic shock

•  Recognize septic shock in adults when infection is suspected or confirmed AND vasopressors are needed to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) 265 mmHg AND lactate is 22 mmol/L, in absence of hypovolemia.
23

EDLIZ2020
•  Recognize septic shock in children with any hypotension (systolic blood pressure [SBP] <5th centile or >2 SD below normal for age) or 2-3 of the following: altered mental state; tachycardia or bradycardia (HR <90 bpm or >160 bpm in infants and HR <70 bpm or >150 bpm in children); prolonged capillary refill (>2 sec) or warm vasodilation with bounding pulses; tachypnoea; mottled skin or petechial or purpuric rash;  increased lactate; oliguria;  hyperthermia  or hypothermia.
•  Adults, give at least 30 ml/kg of isotonic crystalloid in 3 hours. Give 20 ml/kg as a rapid bolus and up to 40-60 ml/kg in the first 1 hr.
•  Do not use hypotonic crystalloids, starches, or gelatines for resuscitation.
•   Fluid resuscitation may lead to volume overload, including respiratory failure. If no response discontinues. This step is particularly important where mechanical ventilation is not available.
•  Administer vasopressors when shock persists during or after fluid resuscitation. The initial blood pressure target is MAP 265 mmHg in adults and age-appropriate targets in children.
•  Vasopressors (VPs) can be given through a peripheral IV if a central line is not available but use a large vein and closely monitor for signs of extravasation and local tissue necrosis. If extravasation occurs, stop infusion. VPs can also be administered through intraosseous needles.
•  If signs of poor perfusion and cardiac dysfunction persist despite achieving MAP target with fluids and vasopressors, consider inotropes e.g. dobutamine.


How DO WE DECIDE WHEN TO DISCHARGE A CASE?

•  Criteria for discharging patients from isolation (i.e., discontinuing transmission-based precautions) without requiring retesting:
•  For symptomatic patients: 10 days after symptom onset, plus at least
3 additional days without symptoms (including without fever and without respiratory symptoms);
•  For asymptomatic cases:10 days after positive test for SARS-CoV-2.
•  As the disease evolves, follow national guidance on discharge.


POST --DISCHARGE:
How should the patient behave or what should they do to prevent getting infected again?

•  We have no concrete evidence that those infected with COVID-19 will develop immunity and if so for how long. We will extrapolate that
24

EDLIZ2020

information from other viral infections where immunity develops but if this new corona virus mutates, it is likely that one might get re-infected as happens with e.g. influenza.
•  If a patient has been discharged on the basis of two negative COVID- 19 tests, there will be no need for additional isolation post-discharge.
•  If the patient has been discharged on the basis of clinical improvement, the patient should self-isolate at home for at least 72 hours after resolution of fever and shortness of breath.

RECOMMENDED SPECIFIC ANTIVIRAL INTERVENTIONS FOR
€OVID-19

•  We do not currently have any specific therapies for COVID-19 and any use of medicines is "off-label".
•  Use of any medicines like Chloroquine, Hydroxychloroquie, Lopinavir/Ritonavir, Interferon alpha-2b or Remdesivir etc. should be in a clinical trial setting.
e.g. WHO SOLIDARITY Trial or any other trials that will have been approved by our institutional and national review boards such as
MRCZ, MCAZ.

























25

EDLIZ2020
4.0 PAEDIATRIC CONDITIONS
GENERAL NOTES                                27
NEONATAL CONDITIONS                           27
ROUTINE MANAGEMENT AT BIRTH                     28
RESUSCITATION OF THE NEWBORN                    28
FEEDING AND FLUIDS                             31
NEONATAL INFECTIONS                           33
JAUNDICE                                    37
CONVULSIONS                                 38
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME (RDS)              40
VITAMINS AND IRON                              41
PAEDIATRIC CONDITIONS                          46
GENERAL GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF ANTIBIOTICS        46
ACUTE RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS                    46
DIARRHOEA IN CHILDREN                          58
ACUTE MALNUTRITION                            67

























26

EDLIZ2020

GENERAL NOTES:
The content of this chapter reflects the major causes of infant mortality and morbidity in Zimbabwe - prematurity, neonatal sepsis, perinatal asphyxia, acute respiratory infections, diarrhoeal diseases, malnutrition and, immunizable diseases. Some of the paediatric conditions may have underlying HIV infection.
Refer to relevant chapters in EDLIZ for other paediatric conditions and note that appropriate paediatric doses have been included.
•  Note: doses are also given by age and weight wherever possible, and volumes of liquids or injections to be administered are indicated. However, always check the concentration of the preparation, as preparations may change. This should not be a 'short-cut' to calculating the proper dose.

NEONATAL CONDITIONS
Medicine Dosage for Infants Under 1 Month
During the first month of life absorption, metabolism and excretion in a baby are not yet fully developed. For this reason, the frequency of medicine dosing is based on gestational age and not on the characteristics of the medicine.
The table below gives the frequency of dosing for all medicines and is referred to in the therapies that follow in the text.
Table 4.1 Frequency of dosage by gestational age


Gestational age 2 37 weeks (term baby)
First two days       2 doses per 24 hours
3 days to 2 weeks     3 doses per 24 hours
> 2weeks        4 doses per 24 hours Gestational age< 37 weeks (pre-term baby)
First week         2 doses per 24 hours
1.4 weeks         3 doses per 24 hours
> 4weeks         4 doses per 24 hours

NB:  Not  for gentamicin- see table 4.3

For example: Benzyl penicillin dose 100,000u/kg/dose (0.1MU/kg). Thus, a 2kg pre-term baby 5 days old would receive 200,000u Benzyl penicillin every 12 hours, whilst a 2kg term baby 5 days old would receive 200,000u every 8 hours.






27

EDLIZ2020
Routine Management at Birth
•  Do not routinely suction mouth but suction only if there is something (e.g. thick meconium) to suck out.
•  Dry and wrap up, preferably in a dry pre-warmed soft towel.
•  Delayed cord clamping - clamping the umbilical cord after 1 minute is recommended for all normal births except in intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), infants of diabetic mothers and asphyxia.
•  To prevent neonatal ophthalmia, instil eye ointment into both eyes:


Medicine

tetracycline eye ointment 1%
Codes  Paed dose    Frequency  Duration

C  V  instil into both  once only  at birth eyes
•  To prevent haemorrhagic disease of the newbom, give:

Medicine     Codes   Paed dose  Frequency  Duration

vitamin K im    C   V  1mg     once only   single dose
[preterm =
0.5mg]

•  Hand the baby to the mother for her to put immediately to breast.

Resuscitation of the newborn
Essential Newborn Care

•  Apply tetracycline ointment to the eyes
•  Give Vitamin K 1mg IM once
•  Weigh the baby
•  Put baby skin to skin with the mother
•  DO NOT LEAVE THE BABY ALONE















28

EDLIZ2020
Senf6qt
fd Act hi rmer
v's
'



'





p war
lop
Cler alrwryltmt d
Set  iwrt
ta tug'
Check b  ttbg










Me 'lte
wth m•et
•
iort b'eer t ct mo calfferhelp»
, p   tilertle
letre'eing
letnett





lw'
+ Cu  ti    oil i
D ±du en odedoar

Figure 4.1 Action plan to help babies breathe
29

EDLIZ 2020

Cler afwe  w
loll or on                   orev cane
Godel to       e     •  lade art
dolorpd                   •   •
Terewtote                    •   "d' ee



»
 •
#ode wart
•  leantfr.lo
•
fie cl 6.r 4an weary
wry stole nepotio
Ge4a wore



�
clerewratit, lrt .e ado.dee       I
 I wt   I  I ();/U <IDD   I   \
]ea. pit. MR >roo  I 
let.late wt aa   •


I HR « 0    I   I HR > 60     I

�
Verla .th a dad
dalr ea.cl nee


8  [.  i






















+if






• d  ell
it

I
I

fgre42 Essental steps for newborn care

30

EDLIZ2020
Ensuring adequate warmth and ventilation (either by mask or intubation) is much more important than administering any medicines.
The following may be useful:
For respiratory depression, but only if the mother was given pethidine in labour:


Medicine        Codes  Paed dose        Freq.   Duration naloxone neonatal  B   V  <1kg  10mcg   =0.5ml    repeat     as 20mcg/ml im           1-2kg  20mcg   =1ml     necessary
NB: check strength.      2-3kg  30mcg  =1.5ml
>3kg  40mcg  =2ml
adrenaline dilute to  C   V      10mcg  1ml/kg 1:10000


Only if the baby has no spontaneous breathing after 5 minutes of ventilation, give a slow intravenous injection directly into the umbilical vein:


Medicine

sodium bicarbonate 4.2% slow iv
Codes  Paed dose B  N  4-6ml/kg
Freq.  Duration
or 2-3 ml/kg of 8.4% solution diluted with equal quantity of water for injection, if only strength available.

Helping babies survive
Every newborn baby must receive the 'Essential Care for Every Baby' package of care. This is essential for preventing and managing common illnesses in the first 24hrs of life because that is when newborn mortality is highest.
See management algorithm on the next page

Feeding and Fluids
Healthy term babies and late preterm babies more than 34 weeks are usually able to suck unless they are ill.
•  Breastfeed and exclusive breastfeeding is encouraged
•  Initiate breastfeeding within the first hour of life

•  Allow mothers to breastfeed on demand and room-in

31

EDLIZ2020
For sick and/or premature infants who are unable to suck

•  Give expressed breast milk (EBM) via Nasogastric or orogastric tube or cup
•  Use formula feeds only if EBM is not available

•  Give preterm Infant milk formula if < 2000g and/or 35 weeks

•  Standard infant formula 2 2000g Fluid Requirements
•  Infants 2 1500g and 2 32 weeks start on intermittent bolus feeds at 60mls/kg/day and increased by 30mls/kg/day as tolerated to a maximum of 150mls/kg/day for term babies and 200mls/kg/day for preterm infants.
•  Infants < 1500g or < 32 weeks should receive IV fluids to allow gradual increase of enteral feeds. Start enteral feeds at 20mls/kg/day and increase by 30 mis/kg/day.
•  Keep infants <1500g/<32wks nil by mouth immediately after birth (unless mother's colostrum is present) to allow mum to start expressing breastmilk.
•  SEE table below for daily fluid requirements;
Table 4.2: Preterm Fluids and Feed Management Protocol
DAY    0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7
2 1b00g ana 2
32weeks
Total mis/kg    60   90   120  150   180   200
Enteral      60   90   120   150   180   200
Intravenous     0    0    0    0    0    0
1200. 1499g
OR <32
weeks      70   90   120   150   180   200   200   200
Total mis/kg   0    20   50   80   110   140   170   200
Enteral      70    70   70   70   70   60    30    0
Intravenous
1000-1199g
OR<32weeks
Total mis/kg   80   100  130   160   190   200   200   200
Enteral      0    20   50   80   110   140   170   200
Intravenous    80   80   80   80   80   60    30    0
32

EDLIZ2020
<1000g
Total mis/kg    90    110  140   170   200   200    200    200
Enteral       0     20   50    80    110   140    170    200
Intravenous    90    90   90   90   90   60    30    0




Consider transfer to a specialist unit for babies unable to feed and requiring intravenous fluids for longer than 3 days. (ALWAYS KEEP THE BABY WARM)
Choice of fluids

•  5% or 10% Dextrose water in the first 36-48 hours
•  10% Neonatalyte after 36-48 hours
Blood glucose must be monitored in the first 36-48 hours and can be stopped if normal.
Breastmilk Fortification
•  Breastmilk fortification helps to meet the increased energy and mineral requirements of preterm infants.
•  Fortify breastmilk of preterm infants < 1500g or < 32 weeks with FM85 when they are tolerating 160mls/kg/day of EBM.
•  Add 0.5g FM85 to bolus feeds of s 24mls and 1g per bolus feed 2
25mls.
•  If breastmilk is fortified a total volume of 160mls/kg/day will suffice to meet energy requirements.

Neonatal Infections
Indications for doing a blood culture and starting antibiotics in first 48 hours
Any Major Criteria or two or more Minor criteria do a blood culture and start antibiotics.
Suspected sepsis - give antibiotics as soon as possible, within 1hr
One minor criterion present - observe the baby on postnatal wards for 12h. Start antibiotics if the baby not feeding well, has respiratory distress or appears lethargic or sick in any other way.


Major Criteria
(Start antibiotics if any of these present)
Confirmed sepsis or chorioamnionitis in mother
Minor Criteria
(Start antibiotics if any two available)

Antenatal:
•  ROM >18h
•  Spontaneous Preterm Birth


33



Confirmed     or suspected sepsis in twin

Seizures
Severe Respiratory Distress in a term infant
Respiratory distress starting more than 4h after birth
EDLIZ2020
•  GBS sepsis in previous baby or documented GBS carriage in this
pregnancy (urine or vaginal swab)


Natal
•  Born Before Arrival
•  Meconium Stained Liquor Postnatal
•   Respiratory distress that is not
obviously related to:
o  environmental hypothermia
o   "delayed transition to extra- uterine  life"  i.e.  mild  to moderate     respiratory distress apparent soon after birth that is improving with time.
•  Hypoxia
•  Apnoea
•   Hypoglycaemia/Hyperglycaemia not otherwise explained
•   Temperature instability not explained by environmental factors
•  Acidosis not obviously related to HIE
•   Unexplained bleeding or thrombocytopenia
•  Mild encephalopathy/Altered responsiveness
•  Altered tone not otherwise explained
•  Feed intolerance/feeding difficulty
•   Abnormal heart rate (<90 or >160)
•  Jaundice in first 24h















34

EDLIZ2020
Neonatal Infections
Table 4.3: Gentamicin dosages:

Premature or full-term neonates
Weight        Age        Dose    Frequency
less than1000gm    28 weeks     5mg/kg  Once every 48 hours for first
two weeks, then once every 36 hours.
1000g to 2000g             5mg/kg   Less than 1 week old once every 48hours
more than >1-week-old once every 36hours
More than 2000g   Less 1 week old  4mg/kg  Once every
1 week and         24hours Once
above             every 24-48hrs

There are usually few localising signs in infants, and accurate diagnosis may not be possible. The following regimens are recommended for suspected sepsis.
Suspected sepsis in first 48hrs:
Medicine        Codes  Paed dose  Freq.    Duration


benzy/penicillin im/iv  C   V   0.1MU/kg and   gentamicin im/iv    C   V   2.5mg/kg
Table 4.1  10 days

Table 4.3  10 days
Suspected sepsis after 48hrs:


Medicine        Codes  Paed dose gentamicin im/iv   C    V   2.5mg/kg
and   cloxacillin im/iv   B    V  30mg/kg
Freq.   Duration

Table 4.3  10 days

Table 4.1  10 days

Kanamycin 7.5mg/kg/dose BD can be used if gentamicin unavailable

Meningitis:

Medicine        Codes  Paed dose  Freq.     Duration

benzylpenicillin    C   V  0.1MU/kg   Table 4.1   14-21 days im/iv

and   gentamicin im/iv   C   V  2.5mg/kg    Table 4.3
and   chloramphenlcol Iv  B   V  12.5mg/kg   Table 4.1

Ampicillin can be used if benzyl penicillin is not available: dose= 50mg/kg





35

EDLIZ2020
For meningitis ceftriaxone can be used as an alternative: dose =
50mg/kg/dose

Necrotising enterocolitis
Give nothing by mouth. Supportive care is vital: oxygen, intravenous fluids, warmth, and nasogastric continuous drainage. Anticipate complications such as bleeding, vomiting, perforation, seizures. Refer for specialist diagnosis and care.
Medicine       Codes  Paeddose   Freq.    Duration

benzylpenicillin   C   V  0.1MU/kg    Table 4.1   10 days Im/iv
and  gentamicin im/iv  C   V  2.5mg/kg    Table 4.3   10 days

and  metronidazole iv  A   N  7.5mg/kg    Table 4.1   10 days


Neonatal tetanus

•  The important principle in treating these babies is minimal handling . Give:

Medicine        Codes  Paed dose   Freq.  Duration

benzylpenicillin im/lv  C  V  0.05MU per  12hrly 5-7days
kg
or   procaine penicillin im C   V  50mg/kg   once  5-7 days
a day

and   anti-tetanus      B   E  500-1000   once   single immunoglobulin im        units      only   dose





•  Control of muscle spasms:

Medicine       Codes  Paeddose    Freq.   Duration

diazepam iv     C  V   0.25-1mg/kg   4-8hrly,    titrated
according to response
[to a max total dose of 10mg]

36

EDLIZ2020
or  chlorpromazine   C   V   2mg/kg/24hrs in    4-6 divided doses iv/im/nasogastric

phenobarbitone   B   E    2.5-5mg/kg    12hrly  for  as  long  as and  iv/im/nasogastric                   necessary



Congenital syphilis: Also see section on STls


Medicine

procaine penicillin Im
Codes  Paed dose C   V 50mg/kg
Freq.

once a day
Duration 10 days


Jaundice
Refer all babies developing jaundice within 24 hours ofbirth to a unit capable ofperforming exchange transfusion.
Referjaundiced babies who look ill.
•  Jaundice developing in well babies may be treated using phototherapy. If phototherapy equipment is not available, expose to the sun intermittently for a maximum of two hours (keep warm). Shade the baby's eyes with a loose-fitting bandage over cotton wool pads. Continue until the baby is no longer yellow.
•  Give an extra 20ml/kg/24 hrs of fluid. Be very careful that the baby does not get cold (or hot). Encourage increased breastfeeding.
Where possible check the serum bilirubin levels
Table: 4.4: Management of jaundice based on phototherapy levels

Management  PHOTOTHERAPY        EXCHANGE TRANSFUSION

Age in days   235/40       <35/40     235/40       <35/40

1        Any visible     Any visible   260
jaundice     jaundice
2        260µmol/l      170 µmol/l    425 moll     260 mol/l
3         300 moll     250 moll    425 moll     340 moll



37

EDLIZ2020
Convulsions

•  Always check for hypoglycaemia. If dextrose <2.2mmol/l (45mg/dl) immediately give:
Medicine         Codes   Paed dose     Freq.   Duration

dextrose 50% slow Iv  C  V
1 ml/kg diluted with equal quantity of water for injection as slow bolus


or  dextrose 10% iv Infusion
A  N  4ml/kg per hour OR
2ml/kg given as a bolus followed by a continuous infusion of dextrose at 6-8mg/kg/minute
•  recheck blood sugar (dextrostix /glucometer) in 30 minutes
If intravenous route impossible give breast milk through nasogastric route -10- 20ml/kg initially and continue normal requirement two hourly. Dextrose should not be given by nasogastric tube. If blood glucose cannot be measured give empirical treatment with glucose.
HOW TO PREPARE 10% DEXTROSE
The formula for preparing 100 ml of fluid with a desired concentration of glucose using 5% dextrose and 25% dextrose solutions is given by the formula 5X.25 = Y where X is the required percentage of dextrose and Y is the amount of 25% dextrose (in ml) to be made up with 5% dextrose to make a total of 100 ml.
To prepare 100ml of 10% dextrose from 5% dextrose and 25% dextrose, add 5x10-25=25ml of 25% dextrose to the remaining volume, i.e. 100- 25
=75 ml of 5% dextrose.

Other common causes of neonatal convulsions: Hypoxic Ischaemic Encephalopathy, Meningitis, Hypocalcaemia.

MANAGEMENT: ABC
Manage Airways and Breathing (have bag and mask ready) Ensure Circulatory access










38

EDLIZ2020
Anticonvulsants:

Phenobarbitone is the drug of choice for neonatal seizures.
Medicine        Codes  Paed dose     Freq.    Duration
phenobarbitone iv  B  E  20mg per kg repeat  over 5-10mins
in 30 minutes if still convulsing,  add dose of 10mg/kg every 30 minutes until a maximum dose of 40mg/kg
maintenance   dose    5mg/kg /day started 12 hours after
the loading dose.
or  phenytoin iv    C  V   20mg/kg iv repeat
dose of 10mg/kg may be repeated in refractory seizures.
3-5mg/kg/day in 2-
maintenance dose      4 divided doses

'indicated when maximum dose of phenobarbitone 40mg/kg fails to resolve the seizures or adverse effects like respiratory depression, bradycardia or hypotension occur. Please note; Dilute phenytoin in Normal saline Do Not Use Dextrose
Benzodiazepines
These may be required in 15-20% of neonatal seizures. Lorazepam: 0.05mg/kg iv bolus over 2-5 minutes (may be repeated)
Midazolam: 0.15mglkg iv bolus followed by an infusion of 0.1-0.4mg/kg/hr

'Avoid diazepam in neonatal seizures because of its short duration of anti- epileptic effect and its very prolonged sedative effect.
Perform lumbar puncture, to rule out any CNS infection and start meningitis treatment whilst waiting for results.
Check blood levels of Calcium and Magnesium

If there is hypocalcaemia give 2mls/kg of 10% Calcium Gluconate.





39

EDLIZ2020
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME (RDS)
RDS is a common problem in premature infants. It is due to surfactant deficiency.
Treatment of RDS
Minimal handling

•  Supplemental Oxygen with nasal prongs Maintain Oxygen saturation 90-94%
•  Use Continuous Positive Airways Pressure (CPAP) ventilation if available.
•  Initially no oral feeds if severe respiratory distress
•  Intravenous fluids (see section on fluids)
•  Treat for neonatal sepsis with antibiotics (see section on NNS)
•  Maintain normal temperature range by Kangaroo Mother Care or using an incubator if available
•  If respiratory distress persists do a chest x-ray to rule out pneumothorax

Prevention of RDS: For pregnant mothers <34/40 and at risk of premature delivery, give Dexamethasone 12mg/kg 24-hours apart for 3 days


Apnoea of Prematurity
Premature infants are at risk of apnoea due to immaturity of the respiratory centre.
Prevention of apnoea
Give caffeine citrate 20mg/kg orally or slowly by intravenous route over 30 minutes and a maintenance dose of 5 mg/kg/day, to all preterm babies <32/40 weeks. Give until 34/40 postmenstrual age.
If caffeine citrate is not available give a loading dose of aminophylline al 6mg/kg iv over 20 minules followed by a maintenance dose of 2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours.
Monitoring for Apnoea
Use an apnoea monitor if available or a Pulse oximeter with alarm turned on for hypoxaemia.
NB. The following conditions can also cause apnoea in the premature infant and every attempt should be made to exclude them and manage: Central

40

EDLIZ 2020 EDLIZ2020
nervous system infections, Hypoxic lschaemic encephalopathy, Respiratory distress syndrome, Hypoglycaemia, Severe Anaemia, Congestive cardiac failure
Immunization:
Low birth weight infants should be given all the scheduled vaccines at the time of birth and any second doses that are due at discharge and according to chronological age.
Vitamins and Iron
Normal newborn babies do not require any long-term vitamin or mineral supplementation.
•  Those babies born at <36 weeks gestation and/or <1.5kg should be given from age 2 weeks:
Medicine     Codes  Paed dose  Freq.    Duration


vitamin D po
B  V  800units
once a day  to age of
3months

and  folic acid po
C  E  5mg
weekly
•  and, starting from the age of one month:
Medicine        Codes   Paed dose   Freq.   Duration


and  ferrous sulphate po   C  E

(60mg/5mls = 12mg elemental   iron
/5mls)
3-6
mg/kg elementa I iron
once a  to age of 3
day   months













41

EDLIZ2020
Table 4.5: Dosages for infants under one month:

Medicine          Route    Dosage         Freq.   (per
day)
Adrenaline 1:1000     iv/sc     0.01mg/kg       -
(=10mcg/kg)
1 mg/ml injection
Amlnophylllne      iv/ infuse   Loading: 6mg/kg over  -
30mins

25mg/ml injection

Maintenance: 0.16mg/kg/hr

Amoxicillin        Po      30mg/kg/dose      2 to 4

125mg/5ml syrup
Atropine sulphate     iv/im/sc   0.01mg/kg       -
0.6mg/ml injection

Benzylpeniclllln      iv/im     0.1MU/kg/dose     2 t0 4

(3g) 5MU injection          (=100,000 u/kg/dose)

Calcium chloride     Iv     0.2ml/kg over 5mins   single dose (dihydrate) injection
0.7mmol Ca/ml (10%)
Calcium  gluconate   lv      0.5ml/kg over 5mins   -
0.22mmol Ca/ml(10%) injection

Chloramphenicol     iv/po     12.5mg/kg/dose     2 to 3

1g     injection

125mg/5ml syrup

Clindamycin       Iv      10mg/kg over 30mins  3

1g injection

Cloxacillin        iv/im/po    30mg/kg/dose      2 to4

500mg   injection

125mg/5ml syrup

42

EDLIZ2020
Cotrimoxazole       Po      24mg/kg/dose      2
240mg/5ml   syrup
120mg dispersible tablet
Dexamethasone      Im      0.5mg/kg/dose      3to4
4mg/ml injection
Dextrose         Iv      5 to 10ml/kg of 5% repeatable

5% infusion                1 to 2ml/kg of 50%
diluted 1 :1 over 3 tc
50% injection              4mins
Dlazepam         iv/pr     0.3.mg/kg/dose      -
repeatable
5mg/ml injection

Digoxin          iv/im     Loading: 10mcg/kg at 8 hour intervals fol total of three doses
0.25mg/ml
50mcg/ml syrup       Po      Maintenance:       1
10mcg/kg/24hrs
Erythromycln        Po      40mg/kg/24 hrs      3
125mg/5ml syrup
Ferrous sulphate      Po      12mg Fe/24hrs      Once
12mg Fe/5ml syrup
Folic acid          Po      5mg           weekly
5mg tablet
Frusemlde         iv/im     0.5 to 2rng/kg/dose    1to 2
10mg/ml injection
40mg tablet         Po      1to 4mg/kg/dose     2
Gentamlcin         im/iv      21500g=        2
2.5mg/kg/dose
10mg/ml injection            <1500g = 2,5      once mg/kg/dose
43

EDLIZ2020
Hydrocortisone       iv/im      10mg/kg/dose       3
100mg injection
lsoniazid           Po       10mg/kg/24hrs       once
100mg dispersible tablets
Kanamycin          Im       7 .5mg/kg/dose       1to 2
1g injection
Metronidazole        Iv       7.5 mg/kg/dose      2 to 3

5mg/ml injection
Morphine           iv/im      0.1 to 0.2 mg        -
1 Omg/ml Injection

15mg/ml injection

Naloxone         Iv       0.02mg/kg repeatable

0.02mg/ml injection     Im      0.06mg/kg repeatable

0.4mg/ml injection
Nystatln           Po       100 000u/dose     4
100 000units/ml

Penicillin procaine     Im      50 mg/kg/24hrs    once
300mg/ml injection             [=50 000u/kg/day]
Phenobarbitone       Iv       10 to  20mg  stat  -
over 10mins
200mg/ml injection

15mg/5ml syrup       im/po     maintenance = 3 to  1to 2
5mg/kg/24 hrs
Phenytoin          po      4mg/kg/dose      2
30mg/5ml  syrup      iv       Loading:   15-20mg/kg  slow
(0.5mg/kg/min)
50mg/ml injection



44

EDLIZ2020
Sodium bicarbonate    Iv      5ml/kg of 4.2%    .
slowly
4.2% infusion (or 8.4%)
Theophylline       Po      Loading: 6mg/kg   3
Maintenance:
200mg tablet              5mg/kg/24hrs
Thyroxine         Po      10mcg/kg/24 hrs    once
100mcg tablet
Vitamin D (calciferol)    Po      800u/day (age    once
>14days)
50 000u capsule
Vitamin K         Im      1mg for 22500g.   .
(phytomenadione)           0.5mg for <2500g

2mg/ml inj.

























45

EDLIZ2020

PAEDIATRIC CONDITIONS
Common paediatric conditions such as acute respiratory infections (ARI), diarrhoea, child with fever (axillary temperature 37.5C and above); severe malnutrition orprotein energy malnutrition (PEM) are now incorporated in the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (/MCI).
General guidelines on the use of antibiotics
Paediatric doses are given in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 (Neonatal doses are given separately in Table 3.5)
•  ALWAYS DO BLOOD CULTURES IN SUSPECTED SEPSIS.

•   supportive measures are often more important than antibiotics themselves: for example, fluids in diarrhoea and vomiting;

•   antibiotics should be given in the full dosage appropriate for the age and weight of the child; dosage is best calculated according to body weight up to 40kg (do not exceed the adult dose);
•    change  to  oral  administration  wherever  possible  (except  for meningitis); benzylpenicillin intramuscularly/ intravenously can be changed to procaine penicillin intramuscularly (if response is good) once child is afebrile.
Check for General Danger Signs:

Ask:

•   if the child is not able to drink or breastfeed
•  if the child is vomiting everything
•  if the child has had convulsions
•  if there are periods of not breathing
Look to see:

•   If the child is lethargic or unconscious.

A child with any general danger sign needs urgent attention.

Acute  Respiratory  Infections
Check for any general danger signs (above). Any history of fever in a malaria area:
•   take a blood slide

46

EDLIZ2020
•  treat for malaria (see chapter on Malaria) Fever for more than 5 days: refer for assessment.
In malaria endemic areas, a child with pneumonia and a fever of 37.5°C or more (or a history offever) may need an antibiotic for pneumonia and an anti-malarial for malaria.
Management of a child with cough/difficult breathing
Note: Antihistamines and sedating cough mixtures MUST NOT be used in managing respiratory infections. Breast milk, warm drinks including water, and fruit are effective cough /sore throat relievers.
Pneumonia is recognised by difficulty in breathing which is either fast breathing or chest indrawing.
Table 4.6: definition of fast breathing:

ined as:


months years
per minute per minute
Chest indrawing is when the lowerpart ofthe chest moves in when the child breathes in.
Grunting is a soft short sound that the infant makes when breathing out.
Table 4.7: Management: of pneumonia

SIGNS       CLASSIFY AS:  TREATMENT
Urgent preeferral treatments
are in bold orint
Any general      Severe        Give first dose of an appropriate danger sign      pneumonia      antibiotic (Benzylpenicillin and or          or           gentamycin)
chest indrawing   very severe     Treat to prevent low blood sugar
or          disease        (see below)
stridor in a calm                Keep the child warm
child                      Treat wheeze if present
Refer URGENTLY to hospital Fast breathing    Pneumonia    ► Give an appropriate antibiotic for 5
days
Treat wheeze if present
Advise mother to return immediately if condition worsens
» Follow-up in 2 days




47

EDLIZ2020
No  signs  of  No      ► If coughing more than 21 days, refer pneumonia or of  pneumonia:    for assessment
very  severe  cough or cold   Treat wheeze if present
disease              Advise mother to return immediately if condition worsens
Follow-up in 7 days if not improving

Management of severe pneumonia:
The major cause of pneumonia is infection with Streptococcus pneumoniae or Haemophilis influenzae. These respond well to the antibiotics recommended below if recognised early.
Note: Paediatric dose starts at 2 months in IMNCI. For babies 1-2 months see neonatal doses Table 3.5
•  Well-nourished children over 6 months with severe pneumonia can be managed with benzylpenicillin only.
•  Give first dose of intramuscular benzylpenicillin and gentamicin and refer child urgently to hospital.
•  If referral not possible repeat the benzylpenicillin 6 hourly and gentamicin once daily.
Medicine      Codes  Paed dose   Freq.   Duration

benzylpenlclllln im C  V 0.05-0.1MU/kg 6hourly  10 days
and  gentamlcin Im   C   V  5-7mg/kg    once   10 days
daily
Note: change to oral amoxicillin when patient improves and tolerates oral drugs.
If less than 6 months add high dose cotrimoxazole for 21 days and check HIV status. In HIV positive children considersteroids
Table 4.8: Cotrimoxazole dosage per age group

Age or weight         Paediatric tablet       Syrup 120mg dispersible    240mg/5ml
2-6 months (4-5.9 kg)         1           2.5mls
6months-3yrs (6-13.9kg)        2           5mls
3-5yrs (14 -19kg)            3           7.5mls





48

EDLIZ2020
Alf HIV positive children should continue with cotrimoxazole prophylaxis at appropriate dose once daily. Infants confirmed HIV infected should commence ART as soon as possible.
•  If benzylpenicillin is not available, substitute with:
Medicine    Codes  Paed dose         Freq.   Duration
ampicillin Iv  B   E   50mg/kg           6hour1y  5 days
or  procaine   C   V   <1yr   ½ml(= 150mg)  once a  5 days penicillin im      1-3yrs   1ml (= 300mg)   day
3-5yrS  1% ml(=450mg)

Supportive measures
•  Prevent low blood sugar:
•  If the child is able to breastfeed ask the mother to breast feed the child
•  If the child cannot breastfeed but is able to swallow give expressed breast milk or a breast milk substitute. If neither are available give sugar water= 4 level teaspoons sugar (20gm) in 200ml clean water.
•  If the child is not able to swallow, give 50ml of milk or sugar water by nasogastric tube.
•  Fluids (po/iv/nasogastric) 100ml/kg/24hrs - iv fluids monitored closely
•  Nasal suction (or normal saline nasal drops) to clear the airway.
•  Continued feeding.
•  Check oxygen saturation
•  Give Oxygen.

Management of pneumonia
•  First line:
Medicine    Codes   Paed dose       Frequency  Duration amoxicillin   C  V   4-<6kg  =62.5mg  3 times a   5 days po           6-<14kg  = 125mg  day
14-19kg  =250mg
•  Alternative: Refer





49

EDLIZ2020


Medicine
or  procaine penicillin Im
Codes
V
Paeddose
<1yr   =TS0mg

1-3yrs  = 300mg
3-5yrs  =450mg
Frequency once a day
Duration 5Gays

•  Reassess after 2 days of antibiotic treatment If not responding then refer, as the second line choices are limited.
•  Treat fever and pain, if present with:
Medicine     Codes   Paed dose   Frequency  Duration
or  paracetamol po  C  N   10mg/kg    6hr1y     as required.

Note: Do not give paracetamol to children under 3 months of age due to liver immaturity, if indicated give cautiously.
Give clear instructions on
•   how to take medicines
•   home care:
continue breast-feeding
maintain nutrition by giving easy-to-digest high energy food 5-7 times a day
v  and plenty of fluids a day.
Advise mother to return with the child in 2 days for re-assessment, or earlier if the child is getting worse:
•  increased difficulty in breathing
•  increased difficulty in drinking
•  increased respiratory rate,
If the child returns with any of these, refer
Table 4.9: Monitoring the child with pneumonia:
Child Worse           Child Same      Child better

• Not able to drink      • Fast breathing   • Slower breathing
• Has chest indrawing               • Fever reduced
• Has other danger signs              • Eating better
C) Refer urgently          Refer      C> Finish course

Management of cough/cold
Home care and instructions on when to return are all that are needed. No
antibiotics, antihistamines or cough mixtures are required.

50

EDLIZ2020
Give clear instructions on
•  home care:
✓  continue breast-feeding
✓  maintain nutrition by giving easy-to-digest high-energy food 5-7 times a day
✓  and plenty of fluids a day.
Advise mother/ caregiver to return with the child in 2 days for
reassessment, or earlier if the child is getting worse:

•  breathing becomes difficult
•  child is not able to drink
•  breathing becomes fast
•  child seems worse
If the child returns with any of these, reassess.
If the temperature is above 37.5C:
Medicine     Codes   Paed dose  Frequency Duration


paracetamol
po


Wheezing
C   N   10mg/kg   6hrly     as required.
•   In a young infant below 2 months, wheeze is a sign of serious illness - refer.
•   An infant between 2 months and 12 months may wheeze because of bronchiolitis, which is usually a viral infection. If a child with bronchiolitis is breathing fast, refer. If not, give home care.
•   In a child more than one-year wheezing may be due to asthma.
If it is the first episode refer. If this child is in distress, give a rapid-acting bronchodilator for example salbutamol and refer.
Children with first episode of wheezing
•  child under 1 year:


If chest indrawing; or any danger sign; or if fast breathing

If no fast breathing
Give first dose of benzyl penicillin and refer urgently to hospital.


Treat as no pneumonia, cough/ cold'. Follow up after 2 days.



51

EDLIZ2020
Children with first episode of wheezing
•  child 1 year and over


If chest indrawing; or any danger sign

If fast breathing


If no fast breathing
Give rapid-acting bronchodilator, oral prednisolone and antibiotic
Refer urgently to hospital
Nebulise with salbutamol or Give oral bronchodilator; Send home on treatment as pneumonia:
Follow up in 2 days
Nebulise with salbutamol or Give oral bronchodilator; Send home on treatment as no pneumonia, cough/
cold;
Follow up in 7 days

Children with Previous Episodes of Wheezing
•  child under 1 year


If chest indrawing; or any danger sign

If fast breathing


If no fast breathing
Nebulise with salbutamol or Give oral bronchodilator Give first dose of antibiotic
Refer urgently to hospital
Nebulise with salbutamol or Give oral bronchodilalor; Send home on treatment as pneumonia:
Follow up in 2 days
Nebulise with salbutamol or Give oral bronchodilalor; Send home on treatment as "no pneumonia, cough /
cold;
Follow up in 7 days

Children with Previous Episodes of Wheezing
•   child 1 year and over

► Start with


» If chest indrawing; or any danger sign
» If fast breathing


» If no fast breathing

Give a rapid acting bronchodilator
Assess the child's condition 30 minutes later and treat according to this assessment.
Give first dose of antibiotic and prednisolone Refer urgently to hospital.
Give oral bronchodilator
Send home on treatment as pneumonia" Follow up in 2 days.
Send home on treatment as no pneumonia, cough/
cold;
Give  oral  bronchodilator Follow up in 7 days.


52

EDLIZ2020
•   Prednisolone dose in wheezing:

Medicine      Codes  Paed dose    Frequency  Duration

prednisolone    B  V   <1yr   = 10mg   Once    repeat in 6hrs po                                if reqd.
>1yr  = 20mg

•   If a rapid acting bronchodilator is required:
Medicine       Codes  Paed dose    Frequency  Duration
salbutamol       B  V   <1yr      =     as nebulised 5mg/ml                2.5m  required in 2ml sterile water        >1yr      9
=
5mg
or   salbutamol syrup   B  V   2-12mnths  =   3 times po                        1mg  a day
1-5yrs

2
or   adrenaline      C   V   0.01ml/kg up to a  repeat    after subcutaneously          max of 0.25ml    20mins     if 1 :1000                          required

If asthma is suspected refer to Asthma section for detailed management
Stridor
Definition: Harsh noise made when a child breathes in

Management of croup at the primary level
•   If no stridor at rest, do not give antibiotics.

•   If there is stridor at rest or chest indrawing or fast breathing refer urgently to hospital for possible intubation or tracheostomy and a course of cloxacillin and chloramphenicol.
Mild croup
•  Stridor present only when upset.

•   Likely to be of viral origin. An antibiotic is not required. Home care.


53

EDLIZ2020

Severe croup (Laryngotracheobronchitis)
This is stridor in a calm child at rest with chest indrawing.
•  Refer to higher centre of care.
•   Do not examine the throat in case it's Epiglottitis!
•   If referral not possible or there is a delay give chloramphenicol or ceftriaxone and cloxacillin:
Medicine      Codes      Paed dose   Frequency  Duratio
n
chloramphenicol    B   V    12.5mg/kg    6hourly    7 days iv
C   V   50mg/kg     once daily   7 days
or  ceftriaxone iv


and
•

•

•



•
•
cloxacillin iv     B   V  2.5-25mg/kg    6hourty   7 days

Suspect Epiglottitis if child very ill, toxic and drooling saliva. Continue antibiotics
Watch carefully for signs of obstruction. Intubation or a tracheostomy may be required (poor air entry; severe chest indrawing, restlessness, pallor).
Minimal handling (keep on mother's lap) NB. Remember cyanosis is a very late sign.
Foreign Body
Common in age 1-2 years: sudden onset (choking); sometimes local wheeze and/or decreased air entry. May cause stridor/cough; there is usually a history that suggests inhalation of foreign body.
•   Admit for bronchoscopy in order to remove the foreign body.
•   X-ray: opacity and/or air trapping
•   Use antibiotics if there is fast breathing (secondary infection.)
Whenever Foreign Body is suspected consult cardiothoracic surgeons
Retropharyngeal Abscess
•  Surgical drainage is required. Give:



54

EDLIZ2020

Medicine      Codes   Paed dose    Frequency   Duration

cloxacillin im/iv   B  V   25mg/kg/dose  6hourty     7 days and   gentamicin im/iv   C  V   6mg/kg      24hourly     7 days

Empyema / lung abscess

Medicine        Codes   Paed dose    Frequenc  Duration y
cloxacillin iv/im/po   B  V    12.5-25mg/kg   6hrly    6 weeks and   gentamicin im/iv    C  V    5-7mg/kg     24hrly    14 days
Empyema -should also insert a chest drain

Diphtheria
•  Give antitoxin and:
Medicine       Codes  Paed dose    Frequency  Duration


benzyl penicillin lm  C  V  100 000 uniVkg  6hrty
perdose
7 days

Pertussis
Medicine       Codes  Paed dose     Frequency  Duration erythromycin po   C  V   12.Smg/kg/dose  6hrty     10 days


Management of a child with an ear problem See also Chapter on Ear, Nose and Throat Disorders Precautions for a child with a draining ear.
Advise the mother:
•  not to leave anything in the ear, such as cotton wool, between wicking treatments;
•  not to put oil or any fluid into the ear;
•   not to let the child go swimming or get water in the ear.
Mastoiditis
Tender swelling behind the ear.
55

EDLIZ2020
•  Give first dose of antibiotics, paracetamol for pain and refer to hospital.


Medicine      Codes  Paed dose   Frequency

benzylpenicillin   C   V  0.05-      6hrly im              0.1MU/kg
and  gentamicin im    C  V  5-7 mg/kg   24hrly and  paracetamol po   C  N  10mg/kg    6hrly

Acute ear infection
Duration 10days


as required.

Pus is seen draining from the ear and discharge is reported for less than 14 days; or ear pain.
•  Give antibiotics and analgesia:

Medicine   Codes  Paed dose
amoxicillin   C   V  4-<6kg po            6-<14kg
14-19kg
and  paracetamol  C  N  10mg/kg po
Frequenc Duration
=62.5mg  12hrly  5 days
=125mg
=250mg
6hrly   as required

•  Use amoxicillin as first line in children on cotrimoxazole prophylaxis
•  Ory the ear by wicking
•  Follow-up for 5 days
Chronic ear infection
Pus is seen draining from the ear and discharge is reported for 14 days or more.
•  Dry the ear by wicking
•  Instil quinolone drops (such as ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, or ofloxacin)
•  Follow-up after 5 days then reassess.
•  If not improving, refer to ENT specialist.
Managing a Child with a Sore Throat
Antibiotics are only needed for streptococcal sore throats to prevent complications such as rheumatic fever. A streptococcal sore throat

56

EDLIZ2020
presents as tender enlarged lymph nodes in front of the neck and a white exudate on the tonsils.
Sore throat but no swollen tender glands in neck and no pus on tonsils
•  No antibiotics.
•  Give paracetamol for pain.
•  Feed child normally, continue breastfeeding.
•  Give plenty of fluids.

Sore throat with swollen tender glands in neck or pus on tonsils (age > 2 years)

•   Give antibiotic:
Medicine   Codes  Paed dose          Frequency    Duration
procaine     C  <1yr    T72mlsF10mgi   once a day  5 days then penicillin                               penicillin V for
Im          1 to 3yrs  1ml(= 300mg)           5 days
3 to 5yrs  11/2mls( 450mg)
or  amoxicillin    C  <3yrs    = 125mg      3 times      10 days
a day

>3yrs
>12yrs
= 250mg

= 500mg

•  Give paracetamol for pain.

•   General I home care & feed child as above.

Treatment of oral candidiasis (thrush)


Medicine
Codes  Paed dose  Frequency
Durati on

nystatin po


or  miconazole 2% gel po
B E 250 OOOiu
after feeds
C  V  2.5ml
after feeds






57
3-6 times a day
5 days

EDLIZ2020
Managing a child with a blocked nose or nasal discharge
For clear or mucous nasal discharge, do not give antibiotics; keep nose clean with wet soft tissue or cloth and normal saline nasal drops. For a foreign body in nose refer to hospital/admit for removal.

Diarrhoea in Children
About 90% of deaths from diarrhoea in under-fives would be prevented
by:

•  giving extra home fluids or salt sugar solution (SSS) or ORS at home at onset of diarrhoea to prevent dehydration;
•   exclusive breastfeeding for first 6 months of life and continuing breast feeding with solids throughout the attack of diarrhoea lo prevent malnutrition;
•   making sure mothers know when to take the child to a health facility;
•   correct assessment, treatment and continued feeding at the health facility level (see MoHCC Chart and IMNCI Manual);
•   treatment of invasive diarrhoea (bloody stool) with antibiotics;
•   clear instructions on discharge from the health facility for continuing above treatments and when it may be necessary to return for further treatment;
•   referring to hospital for investigation and treatment: severe malnutrition, persistent diarrhoea (lasting > 14 days);
•   appropriate use of antibiotics, no anti-diarrhoeal or anti-emetic medicines.
•   zinc sulphate 20mg/day for 10-14 days to all children 26months and 10mg/day to infants less than 6 months.
If the child has diarrhoea Ask:
•  For how long?
•   Is there blood in the stool?
Look:
•   Is the child lethargic or unconscious?
•   Does the child have sunken eyes?
•   Is the child able to drink or drinking poorly?
•   Is the child drinking eagerly or thirsty?




58

EDLIZ2020
Pinch the skin of the abdomen:
•   Does it go back very slowly (longer than 2 seconds)? Classify the dehydration -- see table 4.10
NB: If temperature is 38.5C or higher look forother causes of fever and treat.
Table 4.10: Classification of Dehydration:


Signs
Two or more of the following signs:
• Lethargic or unconscious
• Sunken eyes
• Not able to drink or drinking poorly
• Skin pinch goes back very slowly









Two or more of the following signs:
• Restless or irritable
• Sunken eyes
• Drinks eagerly or thirsty
• Skin pinch goes back slowly










Not enough signs to classify as 'some' or severe dehydration
Dehydration








Severe dehydration















Some dehydration
Management
» Initiate treatment for severe dehydration (Plan C),
» or if another severe
classification  --  refer urgently to hospital with caregiver     giving frequent sips of oral rehydration fluid or by nasogastric tube on the way. Advise mother to continue breastfeeding.
»  If the child is 2 years or older  and  there  is cholera in your area, give  antibiotic  for cholera.
Give fluid and food for some dehydration (Plan B).
child  also has a severe  classification from  another  main symptom refer urgently to   hospital   with
caregiver    giving frequent sips of oral rehydration fluid on the way. Advise mother to
continue breastfeeding.
» Advise mother when to
return urgently
» Follow -up in 2 days f
not improving.
» Give fluid and food to
treat diarrhoea at home

No
dehydration
(Plan A)
» Advise caregiver when
to return immediately
» Follow -up in 2 days f
not imorovina
e.g. severe pneumonia, severe febrile disease, severe malnutrition


59

EDLIZ2020

Plan A: Treat Diarrhoea at Home
Counsel the mother on the 3 Rules of Home Treatment:
•  Give extra fluid
•  Continue feeding
•  When to return
Explain function of ORT (oral rehydration therapy) to mother Give extra fluid (as much as the child will take)
Tell the mother:
•  Breastfeed frequently and for longer each feed
•  If the child is exclusively breastfed, give Sugar Salt Solution or ORS in addition to breast milk
•  If the child is not exclusively breastfed, give food-based fluids available at home
It is especially important to give ORT at home when the:
•  child has been treated with Plan B or Plan C during this visit.
•  child cannot return to a clinic if the diarrhoea gets worse. Teach the mother how to prepare and give Sugar Salt Solution or ORS.
Explain to mother the reason for giving Oral Rehydration Therapy and what it does.
Show the mother how much Sugar Salt Solution or ORS to give.
Continue to give as much of the normal feeds as the child will take AND give Sugar Salt Solution or ORS.
Amount to give is:
Child's weight x 100 = ml to give per 24 hours
Show mother how to measure this in a container available at home Tell the mother:
•  To give frequent small sips from a cup.
•  If the child vomits, wait 10 minutes. Then continue but moreslowty.
•  To continue giving extra fluid until the diarrhoea stops.
•  To continue (breast) feeding
•  When to retum





60

EDLIZ2020
Plan B: Treat Some Dehydration with Oral Rehydration Therapy
In the health facility give the recommended amount of oral rehydration therapy:
Give approximately 75ml/kg of oral rehydration therapy over four (4) hours
•  Start with 10ml per kg in first hour
•  If the child wants more oral rehydration therapy than this, give more
•  After the first hour give15 to 20mls per kg per hour
•  If the child wants and can take more oral rehydration therapy without vomiting, give more
Show the mother how to give oral rehydration solution
•  Give frequent small sips from a cup and spoon
•  If the child vomits. Wait 10 minutes, then continue, but slowly
•  Continue breastfeeding or other normal feeding whenever the child wants.
Reassess after 4 hours

•  If no signs of dehydration
•  If still some dehydration
facility
► Plan A, and can send home
► Plan B, remaining in health
•  If signs of severe dehydration  ► Plan C, start in health facility and refer
•  Begin feeding the child if not already doing so. If the mother must leave before completing the treatment:
•  Show her how to prepare Sugar Salt Solution at home
•  Show her how much Sugar Salt Solution to give to finish Plan B treatment at home
•   If available give 2 packets ORS sachets to prepare and give at home.
•  Explain to caregiver the reason for giving oral rehydration therapy and what it does
•  Explain the 3 Rules of Home treatment:

1.  Give extra fluid - See Plan A for recommended fluids
2.  Continue feeding and COUNSEL the mother
3.  When to return





61

EDLIZ2020
Plan C: Treat Severe Dehydration Quickly

Start intravenous fluid immediately:

•   Amount of fluid: 30 ml per kg body weight in 1 hour
•   Type of fluid: Ringers lactate
•   OR ½ strength Darrow's solution in 2.5% dextrose iv
•   OR if above unavailable 0.9% sodium chloride solution iv
•   If the child can drink, give oral rehydration therapy while the infusion is being set up (about 5mls per kg body weight per hour).

•   Caution if child malnourished or is a neonate
Reassess after one hour

If response good (Good response: child regaining consciousness and radial pulses easily palpable or child passing good quantity of urine)
Response may be poor if child is hypoglycaemic

•  Continue intravenous fluid at 10ml per kg body weight per hour for next 7 hours

•   Give oral rehydration therapy (about 5mls per kg body weight per hour) as soon as the child can drink

If response poor (Poor response: child remains unconscious or radial pulses weak or undetectable and no urine passed)
•   Repeat 30 ml per kg body weight in next hour
•   Then continue intravenous fluid at 10 ml per kg body weight per hour for next 4 hours

•   Continue to assess hydration status and general condition hourty
If intravenous fluid cannot be started, give by nasogastric tube while awaiting referral
•   Give 20ml per kg body weight per hour for 6 hours
•   Reassess hourly: if there is repeated vomiting or abdominal distension, give fluid more slowly


62

EDLIZ2020
Refer urgently to hospital.
Reassess hydration status 6 hours after starting fluids
•  If no signs of dehydration  ► Plan A
•   If still some signs of dehydration   Plan B remaining in health facility
•   If signs of severe dehydration   Plan C and refer urgently to hospital
•   Begin feeding the child if not already doing so
Child should be referred urgently to hospital if at any time assessment shows poor response.


Persistent diarrhoea
•  Severe persistent diarrhoea is diarrhoea lasting 14days or more and dehydrated. Start rehydration and refer to hospital.
•  Persistent diarrhoea is diarrhoea lasting 14days or more but no dehydration. Advise on feeding (below), give vitamin A, and follow up in 5days.
General notes: persistent diarrhoea
•  if breastfeeding, give more frequent, longer breast feeds, day and night
•  milk feeds should be mixed with maize meal porridge to reduce the concentration of lactose
•   sour milk is better tolerated than fresh milk
•   give fermented porridge if available
•  give foods rich in vitamin A, folic acid and zinc- liver, kidney, dark green vegetables, fish, beans, groundnuts, breast milk, or vitamin supplements.
Indications for antibiotics in diarrhoea:
Bloody diarrhoea, cramps and fever (dysentery):
•  First line:
Medicine    Codes  Paed dose       Frequency  Duration ciprofloxacin  B   V   5-17yrs   20mg/kg  twioe     3 days po                 (max    a day
1.5gm/day
or  nalidixic   B  V  4-<10kg   = 125mg  4 times   5 days acid po         >10kg   =250mg  a day
5-12yrs  =375mg

63

EDLIZ2020

•   Follow up after 2 days.
•   Second line (intestinal amoebiasis):
Medicine     Codes  Paed dose   Frequency   Duration


metronidazole po
C  V  10mg/kg   3 times a  5 days
day


Cholera:
CASE DEFINITION: rice watery diarrhoea, with or without vomiting, causing severe dehydration or death
In suspected cases immediately notify the Provincial Medical Director, and obtain current cholera guidelines. See also the chapter on gastrointestinal conditions.
•    Rehydration is most important. The mainstay of cholera management is rehydration, intravenously or orally.

•   The use of antibiotics is strictly limited to very few indications such as: (i) severe dehydration (ii) high attack rate within a household or
congregate settings (iii) as prophylaxis in areas described under
(ii) or (iv) if specific guidance is provided as part of the cholera response. Start antibiotics after the patient is rehydrated and vomiting has stopped -- usually after 4-6hrs.
•   Always confirm recommended medicines for the outbreak Medicine       Codes   Paeddose   Frequency    Duration ciprofloxacin po  B   V   20mg/kg    twice a day    3days
or   azithromycin po  C   V  20mg/kg    single dose

Composition of fluids

Sugar Salt Solution (SSS)

•   6 level teaspoons of any household sugar (white or brown),
•   ½ level teaspoon of salt (coarse salt may have to be ground fine), dissolved in


64

EDLIZ2020
•   1000ml of clean water measured in any 1000ml bottle (soft drink, oil etc). [The water is boiled only if from a contaminated source and is cooled before adding ingredients.)
'Home fluids'
Any fluids including water, tea, thin porridge, 'mahewu', but avoiding cold drinks with high sugar content.
Oral Rehydration Solution: Full Formula has now been replaced with low osmolarity ORS formula.
It has low levels of glucose and salt to achieve osmolarity of 245mOsm/L resulting in improved efficacy and decreased stool output. It is safe and effective even in children with cholera.


Made in hospital pharmacies as follows:

Low osmolarity ORS
Ingredient              weight
sodium chloride           2.6
trisodium citrate dihydrate      2.9g
potassium chloride          1.5g
glucose, anhydrous         13.5
Water                 to 1 litre




·Trisodium  citrate dihydrate may be replaced by sodium bicarbonate   2.5
grams/litre.
However, ORS may be available in packets (sachets) in certain situations according to current ministry policy.
Give Zinc sulphate 20mg/day for 10-14 days with every bout of diarrhoea in infants 6 months and above. Give 10mg/day in infants below 6 months.

ACUTE MALNUTRITION
(Severe acute malnutrition - oedematous and non- oedematous)
Growth monitoring
Regular weight and height measurements during growth monitoring are very important to assess the nutritional status of each child.




65

EDLIZ2020
Growth faltering
Refers to a child whose weight remains static or is going down on 3 consecutive monthly weighing.
Low-weight-for-age refers to the weight for age below -2 SD. Counselling of the mother should start from the time loss of weight or static weight is identified.
•   If no improvement by the third consecutive month, the child should be referred.

•   Check for malnutrition and anaemia -- see chart below.
Table 4.11: Classification of acute malnutrition in children

Age Group     Measurement           Classification Index

Severe Acute    Moderate
Malnutrition     Acute Malnutrition

Children Less   Classify severe if presence of any of the following: than 6 Months
• Bilateral pitting oedema
• Weight for length s SD (WHO)
• Infant too weak to suckle effectively leading to poor intake
• Mother reports insufficient milk to feed child AND child is not growing adequately

Children 6 to 59   Weight for height    < 3 SD (WHO)     $2&23SD months                                 (WHO)

•           Mid-upper    Arm  < 115mm       2 115mm &< circumference                  125mm
(MAUC)

Bilateral Pitting     Yes          No Oedema

Children    and  Body  Mass  Index  <3 SD (WHO) OR   <2 & 23 SD adolescents ( 5    (BMI) for Age      visible wasting    (WHO)
to 18 Years
Bilateral Pitting     Yes          No Oedema

66

EDLIZ2020
Acute malnutrition and complications
Patients with severe or moderate acute malnutrition AND complications should be admitted for inpatient care. Complications should be managed according to national protocols for different age groups.
Routine Medicines to Accompany inpatient
Therapeutic feeding
Provide routine medicines in both Phases I and II per national protocol as appropriate for age and complications of patient.
Treatment of hypoglycaemia in Severe Acute
Malnutrition
Hypoglycaemia and hypothermia usually occur together and are signs of  infection.  Check  for  hypoglycaemia  whenever  hypothermia (axillary<35.0C; rectal<35.5C) is found. Frequent feeding is important in preventing both conditions.
If the child is conscious and has hypogylcemia give:
Medicine        Codes   Child Dose    Frequency    Duration
10%   glucose   C  E   50ml bolus    once solutlon

Or
10% sucrose      C  E   3ml/kg/Feed   every30      2 hours solution                        minutes
then F.75        CE    11mVkg/Feed  2hourly      2 days

The glucose or sucrose solution (1 rounded teaspoon of sugar in 3.5 tablespoons water), can be given orally or by nasogastric (NG) tube. If the child is unconscious, lethargic or convulsing give IV sterile 10% glucose (5ml/kg), followed by 50ml of 10% glucose or sucrose by Ng tube. Then give starter F.75.
Treatment of Infection in Severely malnourished children
The usual signs of infection, such as fever are often absent in severe malnutrition. Therefore, presume infection in severe malnutrition and give routinely broad-spectrum antibiotic(s) AND measles vaccine if child is > 6months and not immunized (delay if the child is in shock).


67

EDLIZ2020
1. If the child has no complications, give cotrimoxazole paediatric suspension orally or amoxicillin
Medicine     Codes  Child Dose     Frequency  Duration


cotrimoxazole  C V
po
BW24kg  5ml
BW<4kg  2.5ml
twice daily  5 days
or  amoxicillln po  C V    15mg/kg       8 hourly    5 days



2. If the child is severely ill (apathetic, lethargic) or has complications (hypoglycaemia, hypothermia, raw skin/fissures, respiratory tract or urinary tract infection) give iv/im ampicillin AND gentamicin.
•   If seriously unwell give ampicillin and gentamicin or kanamycin. If condition less severe, consider oral broad-spectrum antibiotics (cotrimoxazole or amoxicillin).
Child
Medicine      Code»  Dose    Frequency  Duration
I(kg/feed)
amplclllln Im/Iv   C  V  50mg/kg   6hrly     2 days then  amoxicillin po   C  V  15mg/kg   8hrly     5days and   gentamicin im/iv   C  V  7.5mg/kg   once daily   7 days
Give benzy/penicilin if ampicillin is not available. If the child fails to improve after 48 hours


add   chloramphenicol   BV   25mg/kg   8hrly
im/iv

If the child has chronic diarrhoea

add   metronidazole    CV   7.5mg/kg   8hrly po
5 days




7 days

If amoxicilin is not avaiable continue with ampicillin but give orally 50mg/kg every 6 hours



For parasitic worms, give albendazole 200mg orally a day for three days.


68

EDLIZ2020
Treatment of dehydration in Severe Malnourished Children
Severe acute malnourished children with profuse watery diarrhoea and signs such as sunken eyes, slow skin pinch, absent tears, dry mouth, very thirsty, reduced urine output, rapid pulse and respirations. These should be considered as severely dehydrated.
Do not use the IV route for rehydration except in cases of shock and then do so with care, infusing slowly to avoid flooding the circulation and overloading the heart. Do not give standard oral rehydration salts solution (90 mmol sodium/I) in severely malnourished children as it contains too much sodium and too little potassium children. Give special Rehydration Solution for Malnutrition (ReSoMal).


Medicine


ReSoMal

then
Codes


CE
Child Dose    Frequency        Duration
/(kg/feed)
5ml/kg       every 30 minutes     2 hours 5-10ml/kg/hr    determined by stool   4-10hrs
loss, vomiting and how much the child wants,

Replace the ReSoMal doses at 4, 6, 8 and 10 hours with  F-75 if rehydration is continuing at these times, then continue feeding with F-75
Table 4.12: When ReSoMal is not available prepare as follows:
(Used if no therapeutic milk, F75/F100 as they contain electrolytes)

Ingredient                   Amount
Water (boiled & cooled)            2 litres
WHO-ORS                   One 1 litre-packet'
Sugar                      50g
Combined Vitamin and Mineral mix      3g (CMV)°
If CMV is not available,

Table 4.12b: Electrolyte/mineral solution can be prepared as follows:

Quantity                   grams    molar content of 20
ml
Potassium Chloride: KCI          224      24 mmol Tripotassium Citrate: C6H5K3O7.H2O  81       2mmol Magnesium Chloride: MgCI2.6H2O    76       3 mmol
Zinc Acetate: Zn(CH3COO)2.2H20    8.2      300 mol

69


Copper Sulphate: CuSO4.5H2O Water:
EDLIZ2020
1.4     I 45 mol
Make up to 2500 ml


Weigh the ingredients and make up to 2500 ml. Add 20 ml of electrolyte/mineral solution to 1000 ml of milk feed. Add selenium if available (sodium selenate 0.028 g, NaSeO4 10H20) and iodine (potassium iodide 0.012g, Kl) per 2500 ml.
Vitamin and mineral therapy supplementation in severe acute malnutrition:
Medicine    Codes   Paed dose        Freq.    Duration vitamin A    C  V  <6mnths   50,000iu
(retinol)                       once at the clinic and
po                           one dose at home -2
6-12mths  100,000iu  doses only 1-5yr    200,000iu


and   ferrous     C  E  4-<6kg    6mg Fe

sulphate po
6-<10kg   12mg
1-3yrs   18mg
3-5yrs   24mg
once a   14 days

and   folic acid po  C  E  <6kg     2.5mg    once a    14 days
>6kg    5mg     day
and  albendazole   C  E  22 years   400mg   single    on
po                          dose     discharge
from SC/ direct admission to OTP
Ferrous sulphate suspension has 12mg Fe/5mL Vitamins and Electrolytes
Medicine    Codes  Paeddose  Freq.     Duration
multivitamin  B  E  5-10ml    Daily     1 month syrup po
and  folic acid po  C  E  5mg     Weekly    3 months
and  vitamin A po  C  V  <6mths   50,000 iu   once at the clinic
6-12mths  100,000 iu  and one dose at
1-5yr   200,000 iu  home -2 doses
only
70

EDLIZ2020
•  In all Severe acute malnutrition (oedematous and non oedematous kwashiorkor and marasmic-kwashiorkor children) give:
Medicine         Codes    Paed dose    Freq.   Duration electrolyte mixture po"  B      1ml/kg      4
times  until no
or   potassium chloride    B      1-2mmoll kg        oedema
mixture po


No need for these if on F75 or F100.

Nutritional rehabilitation at the referral level
General guidelines:
•  Keep malnourished children in a special area where they can be constantly monitored.

•  Malnourished children should be isolated from other patients because they are very susceptible lo infection,

•  Try not to separate the caregiver from the child; they should share a bed where possible.
•  Keep the child in a warm environment. Properly cover the child with clothes, including a hat, and blankets. The child must be dried immediately and properly after bathing. Bath time should be minimal and, done during the day.
•  Attempt to incorporate an educational message into each intervention.
•  Intravenous infusions should be avoided except when essential, as for severe dehydration with shock or septic shock.

•  Intramuscular injections should be given with care in the thigh, using the smallest possible gauge needle and volume offluid.

•  The room temperature should be kept at 28-32 degrees Celsius. This will seem uncomfortably warm for active, fully clothed staff, but is necessary for small, immobile children who easily become hypothermic.
•  Those children who do not need emergency treatment for complications should be admitted directly to outpatienttherapeutic

71

EDLIZ2020
programme (OTP) and started on Ready to Use (RTU) feed e.g. plumpy nut, as soon as possible (refer to nutrition guidelines).
Therapeutic Feeding
The therapeutic diet for malnourished children consists of two formulas, F-75 and F-100 or Ready to use Therapeutic Food (RUTF). F-75 (75 kcal/100 ml), is used during the initial phase of treatment, while F-100 or RUTF (100 kcal/100 ml) is used during the rehabilitation phase, after the appetite has returned.
Table 4.13: Inpatient Therapeutic Feeding Recommendations Phase 1



Age Group
Children  <
Months



Children 6
to    59
Months
Product and Prescription
• Give Diluted F-100 at 130 ml/kg of body weight per day
•  Breastfed children should always be offered breast milk before the therapeutic milk, and always on demand
• Give F-75 at 130 ml per kg of body weight per day until the patient re-gains appetite.
• Start with 2 hourly feeds (12 feeds per day), and gradually decrease the frequency of feeding and increase the volume of each feed until the patient is getting 3-hourly feeds (8 feeds per day)


In the stabilization phase give F-75 formula as above. These provide 130ml/kg/day. If there is oedema, reduce the volume to 100 ml/kg/day. Give F-75 from a cup or from a spoon, dropper or syringe if the child is very weak to feed. If the appetite is poor, coax and encourage the patient to finish the feed. If intake does not reach 105ml /kg/day despite frequent feeds, coaxing and re-offering, use a nasogastric tube. If the child is breastfed, encourage continued breastfeeding but also give prescribed amounts of F-75 to make sure the child's needs are met.
Transfer to F-100 formula as soon as appetite has returned (usually within 7days) and oedema has subsided.










72

EDLIZ2020

Table 4.14: Inpatient Therapeutic Feeding Recommendations Phase 2




Age Group
Children
<6 Months



Children 6
to  59 Months
Product and Prescription


• Give twice the volume offered during phase I


• Replace F-75 with F-100 at 150ml per kg of body weight per day
• Gradually introduce RUTF in small amounts until the child can consume  Sachet per day
• When accepted, provide RUTF at 130kcal per kg of body weight per day


In the rehabilitation phase a vigorous approach to feeding is required to achieve very high intakes and rapid weight gain of >10 g gain/kg/day.
The recommended milk-based F-100 contains 100 kcal and 2.9 g protein/100 ml. Readiness to enter the rehabilitation phase is signalled by a return of appetite, usually about one week after admission. A gradual transition is recommended to avoid the risk of heart failure which can occur if children suddenly consume huge amounts.
To change from F.75 to F-100 formula replace F-75 with the same amount of F-100 for 48 hours then, increase each successive feed by
10 ml until some feed remains uneaten. The point when some remains unconsumed is likely to occur when intakes reach about 30 ml/kg/feed (200 ml/kg/d). F-100 can be replaced by an alternative Ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) once the appetite has returned.






73

EDLIZ2020
If commercial formulas F-75 and F-100 are not available, prepare as follows. DO NOT USE HIGH ENERGY MILK.

Ingredient                F.75
ount

F-100

Fresh Cow's Milk             300ml          900ml

Sugar                    100g          50g
Vegetable oil               20ml          25ml
3g  (½
Vitamin & Mineral mix (CMV)      3g (½scoop)     scoop)
Add Water to make           1000ml         1000ml


For alternate ingredients refer to Protocol for management of acute malnutrition
Home management

•   Regularly monitor child's weight: For children less than 1year old monitor weight every month and for those 1year and above, check weight every 2 months.
•   Encourage exclusive breastfeeding up to 6 months (no additional fluids/foods), introducing other foods in addition to breast milk at 6 months, and breastfeeding up to two years. For young children, continue breastfeeding on demand.
•   RUTF is a food and medicine for children with Severe acute malnutrition. (SAM)- oedematous and  non oedematous (Kwashiorkor or Marasmus) only. It should not be shared.
•   Children with SAM (Kwashiorkor or Marasmus) often do not like to eat. Give small regular meals of RUTF and encourage the child to eat often (if possible eight meals a day).
•   Always offer the child plenty of cooled, boiled water to drink while he or she is eating RUTF.
•   Keep food clean and covered. Hygienic food handling and preparation. Use soap to wash children's hands and face before feeding. Wash hands with soap and water after visiting the toilet.
•   Children with SAM (Kwashiorkor or Marasmus) get cold quickly. Always keep the child covered and warm.
•   When a child has diarrhoea, never stop feeding. Give extra food and extra clean water.
As soon as the child gets better, introduce the fortified, family type diet.
Anaemia:
74

EDLIZ2020
Test and treat for Hookworm (see Tropical Diseases) After recovery from the acute state treat with ferrous sulphate.

Medicine      Codes    Paed dose       Frequency  Duration albendazole     C   E   <2yrs    200mg  one dose only
>2yrs   400mg

and  ferrous       C   E   6-<10kg   12mg   once     30 days sulphate po                        a day

1-3yrs   18mg

3-5yrs   24mg


Treatment of Severe anaemia
Children with severe anaemia should be treated with daily iron and folic acid  supplementation.  After completing  3  months  of therapeutic supplementation, children should continue preventive supplementation regimen. Children with SAM (kwashiorkor or marasmus) should be assumed to be severely anaemic. However, oral iron supplementation should be delayed until the child regains appetite and starts gaining weight, usually after 14 days.





















75

EDLIZ2020
4.1 PAEDIATRIC HIV INFECTION
See National Guidelines on Antiretroviral Therapy.
GENERAL NOTES                            77
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC HIV RELATED CONDITIONS   78
PAEDIATRIC MEDICINES DOSES                  80








































76

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES
Paediatric HIV infection can be significantly reduced by implementing an effective Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT) program. Symptomatic HIV infection may be difficult to distinguish from other childhood  conditions such  as  respiratory infections,  diarrhoea  and malnutrition. Suspect HIV related disease if two or more of the following signs are present:
•  severe or recurrent pneumonia
•  generalised lymphadenopathy
•  hepato-splenomegaly
•  failure to thrive
•  severe/recurrent oro-pharyngeal candidiasis.
•  finger clubbing


In the majority of cases, the route of transmission is from mother to child. Ensure pre-test counselling of parents/caregivers before testing the child for HIV infection. Antibody detection tests are not diagnostic of true infection before 18 months due to persistence of maternal antibodies in the child.
General Guidelines for HIV care in children

•   Nutrition; advise the caregiver on high calorie diet and other essential nutrients for the child. Safe food and waterpractices

•    Hydration: oral rehydration, together with dietary advice is most important in the management of persistent diarrhoea. Intravenous fluids may be needed during severe diarrhoeal episodes.
•    Immunisation:  BCG  should  be given  to all  children  at birth . Immunisation is contraindicated only where there is symptomatic HIV infection. The current recommendation is to give the other live vaccines, measles and oral poliomyelitis vaccine even in immune- compromised children. [See chapter on Immunisation.]
•   Home care: is preferable to hospital admission for chronic care.
•   Counselling: the family will require support in facing the emotional and financial demands of the child's chronic ill health as well as those arising from the parents' own HIV status. Facilitate access to 01 clinics.





77

EDLIZ2020
Management of Specific HIV related Conditions
Bacterial infections
In the HIV infected child infections are likely to be more frequent, of longer duration with a poorer response to treatment. Septicaemia, meningitis, pneumonia and abscesses frequently occur before any other features of HIV infection are evident. The causative organisms, however, are likely to be similar to those found in non-HIV-infected children and the standard guidelines on the choice of antibiotics apply. (However, in a child with severe pneumonia where Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP) is suspected, a course of high dose cotrimoxazole (60mg/kg every 8hrs) and steroids are indicated.
Once a child is diagnosed as having HIV-related pneumonia
cotrimoxazole prophylaxis should be commenced:

Medicine      Codes  Paed dose      Frequency  Duration

cotrimoxazole po
C  V   <  6mths = 120mg  onceaday   for
paediatric
6-12mths  = 240mg         life
>1 year  = 480mg

There is an increased risk of tuberculosis infection in the HIV infected child. Where TB is confirmed, or with a diagnosis of probable TB, use the anti-TB  treatment regimens recommended  in  the Chapter on Tuberculosis.
Recurrent/ persistent diarrhoea: current evidence suggests that no single pathogen is responsible for the persistence of episodes of diarrhoea (>14 days). Follow the diarrhoea management guidelines in the section on diarrhoea.
Chronic otitis media, oral candidiasis, eczema/ papular rash, and anaemia, may be related to HIV infection but are managed according to standard guidelines.
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis (LIP) is more commonly seen, presenting after the first year of life. Short term steroids have been used with good effect in children with severe respiratory symptoms. Give first
dose of antibiotic (see management of pneumonia) and  refer for specialist diagnosis. Child needs to be initiated on ART.



78

EDLIZ2020











-uEp
-�
E       E  E
c
L     5c3 0ic U
o


S]s ls gla glglsglgg
GD



c
8
Cl)  %
gc  EE
"C  €
0
E
o
0
II)
::,
>,
0
E
E
.0..
9....
;
U
c c
QI
0
c
B
QI
II)    £
0
0





0
<C





















c!ioJ?
V




c
£c o E
t
c'




















!iJ?
�
V
co

G
£
oc
E
c
h


s-
<
e
8c

E  E
0o
€  €








c
C:
o
E
�c
d

EDLIZ2020
Paediatric Medicines Doses
Notes on Paediatric Medicines Doses:

•   for infants under one month see Tables 4.1,4.2, 4.3 and 4.5;
•   read the "dosage" column carefully in conjunction with the "doses/day" column;

•   do not exceed the adult dose: the dosage per kg is not applicable for children > 40kg;

Table 4.16: Dosages for Children and Infants Over 2 Months
For antibiotics where "Doses/Day" give a range (e.g. 2-4) the number of doses/day should be chosen according to both the baby's gestational age and postnatal age. Do not exceed the frequency recommended in the table.
Medicine            Route     Dose                 Frequency Acetylcysteine         iv       150mg/kg  over  15mins      -

200mg/ml injection             then 50mg/kg over 4hours
then 100mg/kg over 16hours Adrenaline 1:1000      SC       0.01mi/kg, repeat after 20mins   -
1 mg/ml injection       im      0.3t0 0.5ml IM
Aminophylline        iv       Loading: 6mg/kg over 30mins    -
25mg/ml injection       po

Amoxicillin          po      16mg/kg              8hrly

125mg/5ml syrup

Ampicillin          im/ iv      mild 12.5 mg/kg          6hrly

500mg injection               severe 25mg/kg
Atropine sulphate       im       Pre-operatively 0.02mg/kg      -

0,6mg/ml injection

Benzy/penicillin        iv! im     50 000 - 100 000u/kg        6hrly 3 g injection = 5MU              (0.05 --0.1MU/kg)



80

EDLIZ2020

Chloramphenicol      iv/      mild 12.5mg           6hrdy

1g injection; 125mg/5ml   im/po   severe (meningitis) 25mg/kg
Sy

Chlorpromazine       iv/ im/po   0.75mg /kg            4 times a day

25mg/ml injection 50mg/5ml syrup

Clindamycin         po /im    mild   4mg/kg          6hrly

75mg/5ml  syrup;  250my      severe 10mg/kg capsule; 1g injection

Cloxacillin         iv! irm/po   12.5 t0 25mg/kg         6hrty

125mg/5ml syrup; 250mg capsule; 0.5g injection


Table 4.16: Dosages for Children and Infants Over 2 Months: [contd.]

Medicine          Route    Dose              Frequency

Codeine Phosphate     po      0.4mg/kg             6hrly
30mg tab                (1yr = 0.75mg/kg)
Cotrimoxazole       po      normal dose 30mg/kg       12hrly
120mg tab; 480mg            high dose 60mg/kg        8hrly tab;   240mg/5ml
syrup
Diazepam         iv! pr/ po   0.2t0 0.5mg/kg/24 hours     Var 5mg/ml injection
Digoxin           po      initial 0.01mg (10mcg)/kg     8hdy for 3 doses
62,5mcg tab / 50mog/ml elix       maintenance 0.005mg      12hrly
(5mag)/Mg
Erythromycin        po      6.25 10 12.5mg/kg         6hrty
125mg/5ml syrup
Ethambutol         po      15mg/kg             once a day 100mg dispersible lab
Ferrous Sulphate      po      2mg iron Ag            3 times a day
60mg iron lab / 12mg  iron/5ml syrup
Folic acid          po      1 to 2mg/kg           once a day 5 mg

81

EDLIZ2020
Frusemide         iml/ iv    0.5mg to 1mg/kg         once a day 10mg/ml injection; 40 mg lab  po      1 to 3mg/kg
Gentamicin        iv! im    7.5mg/kg           once a day 20mg/ml injection; 40mg/ml
Griseofulvin        po      5mg kg             12hly

125 mg/5mt; 125mg tab; 500mg tab

Hydrochlorothiazide     po      0.5mg /kg            12 hourly

25mg tablet
Hydrocortisone      rv      100 t0 200 mg/dose depending  -
on indication
100mg injection

Ibuprofen          po      5-10mg/kg            3 time a day

100mg/5ml; 200mg tab

Isoniazd          po      10 to 20mg/kg          once a day

100mg tab

Kanamycin         m     7.5mg/kg            12hrty

1g injection

Ketoconazole        po      5 to 10mg/kg          once a day

200mg tab;100 mg/5ml

Lamotrigine        po      0.2-4mg/g           12 hrdy 25mg tab, 100mg
Metronidazole      pr/iv    severe anaerobic inf. 7.5mg/kg
200mg  tab  I  1gm  po     intestinal amoebiasis 10mg kg

suppository 5mg/ml ij;
200mg/5ml

po     giardiasis 5mg'kg
8hrty
Morphine Sulphate     im/o    Up to 0.25mg/kg per dose     -

15mg/ml

injection;

5ma/5ml svrup




82

EDLIZ2020
Table 4.16: Dosages for Children and Infants Over 2 Months: [contd.]

Medicine         Route     Dose              Frequency

Nitrofurantoin      po      1.5mg/kg (age >3mnth)     4 times a day

50mg tab

Paracetamol       po       10mg/kg            6hrly

125 mg tab; 500mg tab; 120mg/5ml syrup

Penicillin V        po       12.5mg/kg           6hrly

125mg/5ml   syrup; 250mg tablet

Pethidine        iv! imVo     1mg/kg             not less than
4hrty
50mg/ml injection

Phenobarbitone     iv/im/ po    5mg/kg             once at night

30mg tab; 15mg/5ml mixture; 200mg/ml In).
Prednisolone       po       1to2mg/kg           once a day

5mg tab scored

Procaine penicillin    mn      50mg/kg            once a day

300mg/ml injection

Promethazine      po /m     0.3mg/kg            3 times a day

25mg  tab;  5mg/ml syrup;   25mg/ml injection
Propanolol        po /im     1mg/kg            3 times a day

40mg tab

Ranilidine        po       1-6 months 1mg/kg       3 times

150mg tab               6m+-3yrs 2-4mg/kg        2 times

a day 2

3-12yrs 2-4 mg/kg (up to    lines
5mkkg max 300mg)
a day


83

EDLIZ2020
Rifampicin         po       10 to 20mg'kg          Daily

300mg cap, 100mg/5ml syrup
Salbulamol        neb po/    nebulised 2.5mg in 2mis saline  -
4mg tab; 2m/5ml syrup inh     maintenance 0.1mg/kg     3 times a day 5mg/ml solution; 100mo
dose inhaler

 Sodium valproate     po      Aged 1month to 12 years: 5-   2 times aday
7.5mg/kg
200mg
Aged 12-18 years   10-
30mg/kg

 Theophylline   po       5mg/kg (max 4 doses/ 24hrs)   6hrly
(age > 6 months)
200mg tab, 60mg/5ml syrup

Thyroxine sodium     po       10 10 50mcg/kg         once a day

100microgram tab




















84

EDLIZ2020
5. IMMUNISATION
GENERAL NOTES                          86
IMMUNISATION SCHEDULE FOR CHILDREN          87
IMMUNISATION DETAILS FOR AVAILABLE VACCINES   89











































85

EDLIZ2020

GENERAL NOTES
The terms Immunisation and Vaccination will be used interchangeably in this chapter. Further information on immunisation may be found in the Manual for the Zimbabwe Expanded Programme on Immunisation (ZEPI). Information relating to rabies can be found in the chapteron tropical diseases

DISEASES PREVENTABLE BY IMMUNIZATION
•  Diphtheria
•  Measles
•  Rubella
•  Hepatitis B
•  Pertussis (whooping cough)
•  Poliomyelitis
•  Rotavirus Diarrhoea
•  Rabies (see Tropical disease section)
•  Tetanus
•  Tuberculosis
•  Typhoid
•  Some pneumonias, septicaemia and meningitis (caused by Haemophilus Influenza type Band Streptococcus pneumoniae)
•  Diarrhoea, vomiting and systematic upset due to Rotavirus infection.
•  Cancer caused by Human Papilloma Virus infection.
•  (There are other vaccine preventable diseases for example, Anthrax that are not yet provided under the national immunization programme

COLD CHAIN
•  All vaccines should be kept at temperatures of +2°C to +8°C.

MANAGEMENT OF OPEN VIALS
•  Open vials of DTP, DTP-Hep B-Hib (Pentavalent), DT, Td, OPVIPV, HPV and Hep B may be used in subsequent sessions for a maximum of 28 days (ZEPI Policy) provided the vaccine has not expired, the vaccine vial monitor (VVM) has not reached the discard point, the vial has not been contaminated, the vaccine has been kept in appropriate cold chain condition.
•  Any vaccine that contains an ingredient that has not yet been approved by WHO for Multi-dose vial policy (e.g Typhoid vaccine-Typbar-TCV 5-dose vial), once opened should be discarded after 6 hours of opening.
•  Reconstituted vials of measles-rubella and BCG vaccines must be discarded after 6 hours or as per manufacturer's instructions, whichever comes first.




86

EDLIZ2020
EFFECTIVENESS OF VACCINES IN HIV INFECTED INDIVIDUALS
EPI recommended vaccines have shown satisfactory sero-conversion rates in early stages of HIV infection. However, the proportion of responders decreases with progression from HIV infection to AIDS.
•  Children with known or asymptomatic HIV infection should receive all EPI vaccines according to the schedule.
•  BCG vaccine should not be given to children with clinical symptoms of HIV infection.

CONTRAINDICATIONS TO VACCINATION
There are very few absolute contraindications to vaccines. Fever, diarrhoea,  mild  respiratory  infection  and  malnutrition  are  not contraindications to vaccines.
•  BCG vaccine should not be given to a child with symptomatic HIV infection but polio and measles/rubella vaccines should be given to children with HIV and AIDS together with other vaccines.
•  The current DTP contains whole cell pertussis, some children are sensitive to whole cell pertussis and a second or third dose of Pentavalent and DTP at 18 months should not be given to a child who severely reacted to a previous dose of Pentavalent. OT should be given instead (Note: DTP in Pentavalent contains whole cell Pertussis which may cause severe anaphylaxis, collapse, or convulsions).
•  A child with an evolving neurological disease such as uncontrolled epilepsy or progressive encephalopathy should not be given Pentavalent or DTP. Give OT instead.


ADVERSE EVENTS
All adverse events following immunisation should be reported using the 'Adverse Events Following Immunisation' (AEFI) form. Health workers should refer to the ZEPI AEFI guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures

Immunisation Schedule for Children
See Table 4.1. This schedule is the only schedule to be used in Zimbabwe. Ages given are minimum ages for each vaccination. Children should receive doses at these stated ages or at the first contact after reaching that age (maximum age limits are: Hepatitis B birth dose within the first
24 hours after birth, BCG 11 months, Rotavirus 24 months , and Pentavalent 23 months, Measles Rubella 5 years).
•  Always check the dosage instructions in the manufacturer's information supplied with the vaccine, as the strength may vary between manufacturers.
•  Always remember to record the batch number of the vaccine on the child's health card when entering the date of immunisation.

87

EDLIZ2020
•   Always ensure that the emergency box is available and is stocked with appropriate emergency medicines.
Table 5.1: Immunisation schedule by age
Name of     Age     of  Route       Site       Dosage Vaccine     administration


BCG       At birth or first  lntradermal    Insertion of   0,05ml contact                right deltoid
before one             muscle
year
Hepatitis B    At birth or    Intramuscular   Right      0,5ml within  24              anterolateral
hours of              aspect of
delivery               mid thigh
OPV1       6 weeks     Oral        Oral       2-3
drops
DPT-HepB-   6 weeks      Intramuscular   Right      0,5ml Hib1                           anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Pneumococc   6 weeks      Intramuscular   Left       0,5ml al 1                            anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Rotavirus 1    6 weeks     Oral        Oral       1,5 ml
OPV2       10 weeks     Oral        Oral       2-3
drops
DPT-HepB-    10 weeks     Intramuscular   Right      0,5ml Hib2                           anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Pneumococc   10 weeks     Intramuscular   Left       0,5ml al2                            anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Rotavirus 2    10 weeks     Oral        Oral       1,5ml
Inactivated    14 weeks     Intramuscular   2,5cm from   0,5ml Polio                           PCVsite
vaccine
OPV3       14 weeks     Oral        Oral       2-3
drops




88

EDLIZ2020

DPT-HepB-   14 weeks    Intramuscular  Right      0,5ml Hib3                        anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Pneumococc  14 weeks    Intramuscular  Left      0,5ml al3                         anterolateral
aspect of mid-thigh
Measles     9 months    Subcutaneous  Left deltoid   0,5ml and                      muscle
Rubella
1 (MR)
TCV   9 months    Intramuscular  Left      0,5ml
anterolateral
aspect of mid thigh
Measles and   18 months    Subcutaneous  Left deltoid   0,5ml Rubella                     muscle
2 (MR)
DPT Booster  18 months   Intramuscular  Right     0,5ml
anterolateral aspect of mid-thigh
OPV Booster  18 months    Oral       Oral      2-3
drops
Td Booster   5 years     Intramuscular  Left deltoid  0,5ml
muscle
Td Booster   10 years    Intramuscular  Left deltoid  0,5ml
muscle
Human     10 years     Intramuscular  Right deltoid  0,5ml Papillom                     muscle
a Virus
Human     11 years     Intramuscular  Right deltoid  0,5ml Papillom                     muscle
a Virus

IMMUNISATION DETAILS FOR AVAILABLE VACCINES
•  Always check the dosage instructions in the manufacturer's information supplied with the vaccine as strengths may vary.
•  In the event of a measles epidemic, children aged 6 months up to 14 years may be vaccinated with an extra dose of measles, depending on the epidemiological picture, irrespective of the previous measles

89

EOLIZ2020
vaccination status. However routine doses at 9 months and 18 months should be given as per schedule after the campaign dose.
•  The minimum interval for Hepatitis B2 and Hepatitis B3 is 5 months, if given as a monovalent dose.
•  For premature infants, vaccination should follow the standard schedule (according to age since birth)

INTERVAL BETWEEN MULTI-DOSES OF THE SAME ANTIGEN
•   The minimum interval between doses is 28 days.
•   If a dose of an antigen is delayed, vaccinations on the next attendance should be continued as if the usual interval had elapsed (i.e. 4 weeks have elapsed). All the EPI antigens are safe and effective when administered simultaneously i.e. during the same vaccination  session  but  on  different  sites.  Pentavalent, Pneumococcal, Rotavirus, IPV and OPV are given simultaneously.
•   If a vaccine dose is given at less than the recommended 28 days interval, it should not be counted as a valid dose and therefore should be repeated at the appropriate interval of 28 days from the previous dose. This applies to vaccines given during campaigns such as child health days, national immunisation days or in reaction to outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases.

HOSPITAL ADMISSION POLICY ON IMMUNISATION
•   To reduce nosooomial transmission, Measles vaccine should be given on admission to all children six months to 15 years. This admission dose must be recorded on the graph side of the child health card corresponding with the age at which it was given and written vertically. If the child is 9 months and receives the first dose on admission this is charted on the appropriate section of the card.
•   Health workers should ascertain the vaccination status for all admitted children including those without a child health card and give the appropriate antigens.
•   Children who are very ill on admission should be vaccinated as soon as their condition has improve












90

EDLIZ2020
6. OBSTETRIC AND GYNAECOLOGICAL CONDITIONS
GENERAL NOTES                               92
HORMONAL CONTRACEPTION                       92
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES                          93
MEDICINES INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES    94
LONG TERM HORMONAL CONTRACEPTIVES              94
INFECTIONS, GENITO-URINARY TRACT DURING PREGNANCY   96
PRE-LABOUR RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES               99
PROPHYLAXIS FOR CAESAREAN SECTION              99
NAUSEA AND VOMITING IN PREGNANCY                100
ANAEMIA DURING PREGNANCY                      101
CARDIAC DISEASE IN PREGNANCY                   101
HYPERTENSION DISEASE IN PREGANCY                103
DIABETES IN PREGNANCY                         105
ANAESTHESIA, ANALGESIA, ANTACIDS                 106
CERVICAL RIPENERS/ LABOUR                      107
TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY                      108
MEDICINES IN PREGNANCY AND LACTATION             111























91

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTE:

Medicines should be avoided if possible, throughout pregnancy, and especially during the first trimester. However, medicines may be required for a number of conditions commonly encountered during pregnancy; medicines which are appropriate and safe are covered in the sections that follow. At the end of the chapter is a list of those medicines which should be avoided or used with caution during pregnancy or lactation. The Family Planning Guidelines of Zimbabwe provide comprehensive guidance. Refer to them wherever possible. Instructions for use, contraindications etc, are also found in the manufacturers' package inserts.


Hormonal Contraception
Important: Ensure a free and informed choice by providing counselling on the advantages and disadvantages of contraceptive methods. Oral, injectable and implants do not protect against HIV. For added protection there is need to use a 'barrier' contraceptive such as a male condom, a female condom or diaphragm.
Checklist for those not trained in family planning:
Before prescribing oral contraceptives ask the following questions. If answers to all these questions are 'no', the woman may be given any oral contraceptives. If any of the answers are 'yes', a doctor must first see her.
•  History of severe leg pain or swelling of calf?
•  History of sugar in urine?
•  History of yellow eyes or skin?
•  Severe chest pain?
•  Unusual shortness of breath after walking or light work?
•  Severe headaches (not relieved by pain tablets)?
•  Bleeding between periods or after sexual intercourse?
•  Missed a menstrual period?
•  Missed a menstrual period, and then started bleeding?
•  Very heavy menstrual periods?
•  Increased frequency of menstrual periods?
•  History of mental disturbances?
•  Goitre or history of goitre?
•  35 years of age and over?
•  Painful varicose veins?
•  Had any surgical operation within last 2 weeks?
•  Previous treatment for high blood pressure?
•  History of epilepsy?


92

EDLIZ2020
Oral Contraceptives
IMPORTANT: Instruct the woman to always inform the doctor ornurse that she is taking oral contraceptives when she attends a clinic or hospital. Encourage clients to have a check-up every two years or when she develops a problem.
Ensure that the supplies given to the woman allow herto always have an extra pack ofpills. Also, provide a supply of condoms with the first pack of pills for additional protection if the client is not menstruating. Encourage use of condoms as well lo protect against ST/s especially HIV.
Oral contraceptives fall into two main categories.
Combined oral contraceptives (COCs)
These contain synthetic oestrogen and progestogen and if taken daily they inhibit ovulation. Those with oestrogen content 15-35 micrograms (as ethinyloestradiol) are 'low dose' while those containing 50 micrograms of oestrogen are referred to as 'high dose'.
The lower oestrogen dose pills have fewer side effects than higher dose pills (notably, reduced risk of thrombo-embolism) while maintaining a high rate of effectiveness. Menstruation on COCs will be regular and light.
Progestogen only pills (POPs)
These contain synthetic progestogen e.g. norethisterone or norgestrel. Progestogens protect against pregnancy by thickening the cervical mucus. This type is particularly suitable for lactating mothers.
Menstrual irregularities are a more common side effect.
CAUTION: Progestogen Only Pills have a significant failure rate in non- lactating women. They should be taken at the same time each day.
Conditions warranting withdrawal of oral contraceptives
•  pregnancy or suspected pregnancy
•  severe headaches especially associated with visual disturbances
•  numbness or paresis of extremities
•  unexplained vaginal bleeding
•  suspected or known carcinoma of the breast
•  known liver tumour
•  unexplained chest pain or shortness of breath
•  severe leg pains;
•  development of any of the absolute contra-indications mentioned in the manufacturer's information sheet.







93

EDLIZ2020



Medicines Interactions with Oral Contraceptives
Medicines reducing the effect of oral contraceptives
Caution is needed when prescribing any of the following medicines to any woman taking oral contraceptives; they reduce the effectiveness of the oral contraceptive and pregnancy is more likely:
•  Anti-convulsants: carbamazepine, ethosuximide, phenobarbitone, phenytoin, primidone.
•  Antibacterials: rifampicin, rifabutin, rifapentine
•  Anti-retrovirals: efavirenz
If the medicine is only going to be used for a short time the woman should be advised to take extra contraceptive precautions (for example, condoms or abstinence from intercourse) for the duration of the therapy, and seven days after treatment. If the medicine is to be used on a long-term basis the woman should be advised to use another suitable method of contraception.
Medicines which are made less effective by oral contraceptives Doses of particular medicines may need to be increased, with careful monitoring:
•  Anticoagulants
•  Anti-convulsants (phenytoin)
•  Antidepressants (imipramine)
•   Anti-hypertensive agents (methyldopa)
•  Corticosteroids
•   Hypnotics,  sedatives  or  other  CNS  depressants  (diazepam, phenothiazines)
•  Anti-asthmatic agents


Long term hormonal contraceptives
•  Injectable Contraceptive


Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration medroxyprogesterone   C  V  150mg    once every 3 months acetate im
or   norethisterone       B  N  200mg    once every 2 months enanthate im


CAUTION: If the woman is hypertensive, has a history of heart disease, or has signs of damage to the arteries, vision, kidneys, and/or nervous system caused by diabetes do not administer medroxyprogesterone [Depo-provera @]. Side


94

EDLIZ2020
effects of medroxyprogesterone are like those of Progestogen Only Pills i.e. headaches, irregular uterine bleeding, nausea and vomiting, weight changes and depression. Transient infertility and irregular cycles may occur after discontinuation.
Note: Norethisterone enanthate can be given up to 2 weeks (14 days) early or 2 weeks (14 days) late.
•  Implant Contraceptives
Levonorgestrel implant (Jadelle) is effective for five years and etonogestrel implant (lmplanon) is effective for three years. They are suitable for women who have probably completed their family but are not yet ready for sterilisation. They may also be suitable for some women who cannot take oestrogen-containing contraceptives. HIV positive women of childbearing age who are on a dolutegravir-based regimen should be encouraged to use them.
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration levonorgestrel implant  B  N  2 rods    once only  once in 5yrs

etonogestrel       B  N  1rod     once only  once in 3yrs

CONTRA/ND/CATIONS: hypertension; thrombo-embolism; active liver disease; undiagnosed genital bleeding, severe headaches, malignancy ofbreast (known or suspected); malignancy of cervix, uterus or ovaries (known or suspected), cerebro-vascular or coronary artery disease, pregnancy or suspected pregnancy.

Emergency Contraception
•  Hormonal OC -Within 72 hours ofunprotected intercourse, give:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency    Duration
combined oral      C  V  2 tablets   repeat after 12 contraceptive po                hours
50mcg ethinyloestradiol + 150-250mcg levonorgestrel
or   combined oral      C  V  4 tablets   repeat after 12 contraceptive po                 hours
30-35mcg ethinyloestradiol + 150-250mcg levonorgestrel
or   levonorgestrel      C  V  1 tablets   repeat after 12 750mcg po                    hours

or               2 tablets   once

or   levonorgestrel      C  V 1 tablets     once 1500mcg po


95

EDLIZ2020
Note: Advise to return if menstruation does not occur within 3 weeks. Give appropriate contraceptive advice.
Emergency contraception: intrauterine device method
•  IUCD- copper T within 5 days of unprotected intercourse

Infections of the Genito-Urinary Tract during Pregnancy
Urinary tract infection during pregnancy
Urine specimen for microscopy, culture and sensitivity where possible. Urine strips can also be used to detect UTI especially at the primary health care level
•  First line:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
amoxicillin po       C  V  500mg   3 times a day 7 days
or   ciprofloxacln po      B  V  500mg   2 times a day 7 days
(avoid in first trimester or preferably avoid completely during pregnancy if a safer alternative is available)

•  Second line:
Medicine          Codes   Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
norfloxacln po       B   N  400mg   3 times a day 7 days or   nalldlxic acid po      B   V  500mg   4 times a day 7 days


or   amoxicillin-«clavulanic   B   N  375mg   3 times a day 7 days
acid po
Note: Duration for UT1 in pregnancy longer than other general UTI

Third line: as per culture and sensitivity.

Positive serology for Syphilis during pregnancy
•  Both partners to be counselled and treated with:

Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration


benzathine penicillin im  C  V  24MU
(=1.44g)
once a week 3 doses
See chapter on Sexually Transmitted Infections for further information particularly for women who are allergic to penicillin.


96

EDLIZ2020


Vaginal discharge during pregnancy

The discharge can be due to candidiasis, bacterial vaginosis or trichomoniasis. A syndromic diagnosis should be made before treatment. Need to consider possibility  of  sexually  transmitted  infections  including  gonorrhoea  and chlamydia (see Sexually Transmitted Infections chapter).
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration miconazole pv      C  V  200mg    every night  3 days
or   clotrimazole pessary   C  V  500mg    every night  3 days and  metronidazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day 7days or   secnldazole po      B  N  2g     once only

Clotrimazole cream can also be used Caution: Avoid metronidazole in 1st trimester.
Post Miscarriage Sepsis
Pyrexia in a woman who has delivered or miscarried in the previous 6 weeks may be due to puerperal or post miscarriage sepsis and should be managed actively. Abdominal pain in addition to pyrexia is strongly suggestive. The uterus may need evacuation. Suction curettage or manual vacuum aspiration are safer than sharp curettage and are the recommended first line procedures.

Note: Every year a few women die because of what is thought to be post- miscarriage sepsis when in reality it is fever from malaria causing abortion.
Post-miscarriage sepsis will need a laparotomy and evacuation ofuterus if the patient does not respond to antibiotic therapy.

•  Mild/moderate sepsis:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration amoxicillin po      C  V  500mg   3 times a day 10 days
or   ciprofloxacin po     B  V  500mg   2 times a day 10 days and  metronidazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day 10 days and  doxycycline po      C  V  100mg   2 times a day 10 days









97

EDLIZ2020



Acute Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID)
Acute PID refers to the acute syndrome attributed to the ascent of microorganisms, not related to pregnancy or surgery, from the vagina and cervix to the endometrium, fallopian tubes and adnexal structures. Gonorrhoea, chlamydia, mycoplasma, anaerobic bacteria and gram-negative organisms can cause acute PID.
Mild / Moderate Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

First line:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration ceftriaxone im       C  V   250mg   once only
or   kanamycin im       C  V    2g     once only
and  doxycycline po      C  V  100mg   2 times a day 14 days and  metronldazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day 14 days

Severe pelvic inflammatory disease
Temperature greater than 38C with marked abdominal tenderness. Patients need IV fluids and IV medicines.

Medicine ceftrlaxone iv
Codes  Adult dose
C  V  2g
Frequency Duration
once a day 12 hours after clinical
improvement

and  doxycycline po    C  V  100mg    twice a day 14 days and  metronldazole pr   B  V  1g      12hourly   72 hrs
• Note: Duration as determined by patient's response. Switch to oral after review- treatment for 14 days total.

Alternative

Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency   Duration ampicillin Iv        B  E  500mg    6hourly     48-72hrs
and  gentamicin im       C  V  160mg    12hourly    48-72hrs and  metronidazole pr     B  V  1g       12hourly    72hrs
• Note: Duration as determined by patient's response. Switch to oral after review.
If no response within 48 hours suspect pelvic abscess and patient may need laparotomy or referral. Change to oral administration after temperature has settled.


98

EDLIZ2020
PRE-LABOUR RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES (PROM) (this is
rupture of amniotic membranes at term before onset of labour)

Medicine oxytocin infusion then
(see section on myometrial
stimulants/ induction of labour)
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C  V  1unit initially
4 units in 1L sodium chloride 0.9% at 15,
30, 60 drops per minute until regular contractions
or   misoprostol po      C  V  25 mcg    4hrly   max 3 doses, or   misoprostol pv      C  V  50 mcg    24 hrly   max 1 dose
Note: For oral administration, dissolve Misoprostol 200mcg in 200ml ofnormal
saline or water for injection. This gives a concentration of 1mcg per ml. Repeat dosing of oral misoprostol can be done 24 hours after commencing the initial dose if the cervix remains unfavourable (Bishop score<6). Proceed
with oxytocin infusion if bishop score is favourable.

•  If >24 hours or pyrexia in labour. Early delivery should be effected:

Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency   Duration benzylpenlclllln Iv    C  V  2MU    6hrty     until delivery
and  chloramphenicol iv   B  V  500mg   6hrly
and  metronidazole iv    A  N  500mg   8hrly     until delivery


Switch to oral antibiotics for 7 days after delivery:





and
Medicine amoxicillin po metronidazole po
Codes
C  V
C  V
Adult dose 500mg 400mg
Frequency  Duration 3 times a day 7 days
3 times a day 7 days

Prophylaxis for Caesarean Section As the patient is put on theatre trolley:
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzylpenicillin    C  V  5MU     once only  single dose
iv
or   ceftriaxone iv     C  V  1 gm     once only   single dose or   cefuroxime iv     B  V  750mg   once only   single dose and  metronidazole iv   B  V  500mg    once only   single dose
If during caesarean section there is evidence of infection treat for a week with the above regime.

99

EDLIZ2020

Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy
During the first trimester, if vomiting is not excessive, advise small frequent bland meals and drinks.

Antacids may give symptomatic relief if gastritis is present. If vomiting persists, look for underlying cause e.g. urinary tract infection, molar pregnancy, and multiple pregnancies.

Give:
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration promethazine po    B  N  25mg   once at night as required
or  chlorpheniramine po  C  E  4mg  once at night 5 days
or  metoclopramide po   C  N  10mg   3 times a day as required

Note: If severe, the dose may be given two to three times a day.

Hyperemesis Gravidarum (Vomiting and Dehydration)
Admit or refer for intravenous fluids and give:

Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency   Duration prochlorperazine im   B  E  12.5mg   twice a day   as needed
or  promethazine im    B  V  25mg    twice a day  as needed
or  metoclopramide po   C  N  10mg    3 times a   as needed
day

Anaemia during Pregnancy
Prophylaxis in Antenatal Care
Medicine       Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
ferrous sulphate po   C  E  200mg   once a day throughout
pregnancy
and  folic acid po      C  E  5mg    once a week throughout
pregnancy
or   combined ferrous and  C  E        once daily   throughout folic acid po                        pregnancy
Start at booking forantenatal care. Continue prophylaxis for 6 weeks after delivery. Also give dietary advice.



100

EDLIZ2020

For reducing the risk of neural tube defects

Medicine folic acid po
Codes Adult dose
C E  5mg
Frequency Duration
once a day  preconceptionally and up to 3
months of pregnancy


CAUTION: Iron preparations should be taken after food to avoid gastrointestinal irritation. If vomiting occurs, reduce dosage to that which can be tolerated.
Severe anaemia in pregnancy requires full investigation:
•  stool for ova and parasites;
•  peripheral blood film for malarial parasites;
•  full blood count;
•  mid-stream specimen of urine for microscopy, culture and sensitivity;
•  and HIV test.
Severe anaemia (Hb < 8 gms) after 36 weeks of gestation requires admission
and possible transfusion, as well as oral iron therapy. (See the chapter on Haematology and blood products). Parenteral iron preparations can be used if Hb is <7g/dl.

Cardiac disease in pregnancy
Types of cardiac disease:
•  rheumatic heart disease accounts for over 95% of conditions
•  hypertension
•  puerperal cardiomyopathy
•  congenital heart disease
•  post-operative cardiac patients


Antenatal Management
The woman should be managed and reviewed more frequently by both a specialist obstetrician and physician.












101

EDLIZ2020
In the antenatal period avoid fluid overload, anaemia and infection. Any infection should be treated aggressively with the appropriate antibiotics.
Treatment:
See treatment ofheart failure under cardiovascular disease chapter.
Anticoagulants: long term anticoagulation (e.g. for valve replacement)- using warfarin should be avoided in the first trimester. Alternatively, use heparin or enoxaparin for the first 13 weeks, and change back to warfarin between weeks
13 - 37. After 37 weeks change back to heparin until after delivery. Warfarin can be commenced 24hrs after delivery.
Labour in cardiac patients
Cardiac disease patients should not be induced. They usually have easy vaginal deliveries, which can be assisted by forceps delivery or vacuum extraction to avoid stress.
•  Give a single dose of ampicillin at the onset of labour:

Medicine
ampicillin iv
Codes  Adult dose B  v  1g
Frequency  Duration once only  single dose
•  Keep the resuscitation trolley at hand.
•  Nurse in a propped up position
•  Do not give ergometrine. Use oxytocin:

Medicine oxytocin im
Codes  Adult dose
C  V  10units
Frequency  Duration
once at delivery of the anterior shoulder
•  Post-natally keep the woman in high care for 24 hours and organise regular reviews at the clinic to avoid sudden decompensation.


Contraception:
At 6 weeks after delivery, use the progesterone only oral contraceptive or injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate or progesterone implants.

Hypertension in Pregnancy
Women who develop hypertension during pregnancy (after 20 weeks) have pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH), which is a potentially serious condition possibly requiring early or urgent delivery (see below).
Pregnant women who have essential hypertension may also develop superimposed PIH and merit the same treatment. Methyldopa is the recommended anti-hypertensive throughout pregnancy.
Caution: Avoid diuretic medicines during pregnancy.
Essential Hypertension
Monitor for development of proteinuria.

102



Medicine methyldopa po
EDLIZ2020
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C  V  250-500mg 3-4 times a day review
If not responding refer to district level, where a combination of methyldopa and nifedipine can be used:



Medicine methyldopa po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C  V  250-500mg 3-4 times a day review
and  nifedipine po       B  V  20mg    2 times a day  review

Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
•  Monitor closely and check urine for protein (exclude urinary tract infection). Manage as high-risk antenatal patient.
•  Any pregnant woman (especially primigravida) with a rise of diastolic pressure > 15 mm may have severe pregnancy induced hypertension, even with a BP< 140/90.
Mild Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Diastolic 90-100 mm Hg; no proteinuria.
•  Bed rest at home.
•  Weekly antenatal visits.
•  Admit if there is a history of foetal loss or eclampsia
Moderate Pregnancy Induced Hypertension
Diastolic 100-110 mm Hg; no proteinuria.
•  Admit, monitor blood pressure 4 hourly, and give:

Medicine methyldopa po
and  nifedipine po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency   Duration C  V  250-500mg 3-4 times a day review B  V  20mg   2 times a day  review
•  At gestation> 37 weeks, plan delivery. Severe Pregnancy induced hypertension
•  Diastolic > 110mm Hg; in first 20 weeks of pregnancy -this is likely to be
essential hypertension. Severe PIH in the second half of pregnancy needs careful monitoring for organ damage. Manage as for moderate pregnancy induced hypertension. If not controlled add hydralazine as follows:

Medicine      Codes  Adult dose  Frequency     Duration methyldopa po   C  V   250-500mg  3-4 times a day  review nifedipine po    B  V   20mg     twice a day    review
plus  hydralazine im   B  V   10mg     every 4 hours   review




103

EDLIZ2020
Severe  Pre-Eclampsia (organ dysfunction/ severe features such  as proteinuria,  deranged  kidney,  liver  and  haematology,  placental insufficiency)

Manage as an inpatient. Plan to deliver at 37 weeks or before.
•  Monitor blood pressure 4 hourly.
•  Daily check urine for protein (exclude urinary tract infection).
•  Watch for signs of eclampsia
•  If diastolic > 110 mmHg check blood pressure hourly and continue giving medicines as for severe PIH (above).

Imminent Eclampsia
Proteinuric pregnancy induced hypertension with symptoms of visual disturbance or epigastric pain and/or signs of brisk reflexes:
•  Plan urgent delivery. Prevent convulsions with:

Medicine
magnesium sulphate Infusion
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
C  V  4 gm iv in 20mls of Normal Saline over 20 minutes plus 5 gm in each buttock as the loading dose, followed by 5gm in alternate buttocks every four hrs until 24 hours after delivery
•  Check blood pressure at least hourly. If diastolic pressure > 110mmHg give anti-hypertensives as for severe PIH (above).

Eclampsia
This is pregnancy-induced hypertension with epileptiform fits.
•  Ensure clear airway.
•  Stop convulsions with:
•

Medicine
magnesium sulphate Infusion
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
C  V  4 gm iv in 20mls of Normal Saline over 20 minutes plus 5 gm in each buttock as the loading dose, followed by 5gm in alternate buttocks every four hrs until 24 hours after delivery, or 24 hrs after
the last fit whichever is the later.
•  Plan urgent delivery, within 6 hours.
•  Monitor carefully:
•  Patellar reflex
•  Respiration (respiratory rate must not be less than 16/min)
•  Urine output> 100mls in 4 hours

•  All nurses, midwives and doctors attending to pregnant women should familiarise themselves with the magnesium sulphate regime. Once competence is achieved in its administration, the regime should be used

104

EDLIZ2020
at all levels. At the primary level, the intravenous component ofthe loading dose may be omitted, but the intramuscularcomponent (10 grams) should always be given.
•  Check blood pressure at least hourly. If diastolic pressure >110mmHg give:


Medicine hydralazine im
Codes
B V
Adult dose  Frequency
10mg   Once
Duration
Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetic women who fall pregnant require management before and throughout pregnancy. Some women may develop diabetes while pregnant (gestational diabetes), usually in the second trimester. Ideally, all pregnant diabetics should be managed by specialists. Forgeneral information refer to the relevant section in the chapter on diabetes.
•  Strict blood sugar control pre-conceptually is advised.
•  Good blood sugar control with insulin, diet and exercise is essential. All known diabetics should have their glucose control assessed before conceiving if possible.
•   Throughout pregnancy blood sugar control should be kept strictly within the range 4-6mmol/L. Control should be measured by regular blood sugar profile (admit and take 4 hourly blood glucose levels for 24 hours). Insulin requirements will increase as pregnancy progresses, so profiles will be necessary at frequent intervals of approximately 2 weeks.
•   Labour should be in a tertiary level hospital. Well-controlled diabetics may be allowed to go into labour spontaneously up to term provided the foetus is clinically well. If labour is induced, give half the usual insulin dose in the morning and start an intravenous infusion of dextrose 5% at 1 litre per hour. Labour should not be prolonged. After labour, manage the patient on a sliding scale of insulin.

Anaesthesia, Analgesia, Antacids
•  For indigestion
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration magnesium trisilicate po C  N  10-20ml   as required
•  Prior to general anaesthetics
Prior to general anaesthesia for caesarean sections give:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration sodium citrate po     B  N  15ml     once only
Caution: Particulate antacids (e.g. magnesium trisilicate) may be harmful to the lungs if aspirated; sodium citrate is favoured if available.




105

EDLIZ2020
•  For severe pain in labour
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration pethidine im       B  V  50-100mg  4-6hourly  max. 3 doses
or   morphine im       B  V  5mg     4hourly   as required and  promethazine im     B  V  25mg    once a day max. 3 doses
•  Note: To avoid respiratory depression in the neonate the last dose should be given if delivery is not anticipated within the next 2 hours, and no more than two doses should be given during labour.
•  For caesarean section, spinal anaesthesia is now the standard method to be used. All doctors and nurse anaesthetists should become competent in this method.
If the neonate is breathing poorly after pethidine was given to the mother, give respiratory support plus naloxone. See the section in Neonatal Conditions.
For the incision and subsequent suturing of episiotomies

Medicine
lignocaine 1% local infiltration
Codes
C  V
Adult dose
up to max of 10ml
Frequency once
Duration

Caution: Avoid injecting into a infiltration.
vein! Draw back several times during

Use of steroids in pre-term labour
Steroids are used to prevent respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn in premature labour before 35 weeks gestation. Most useful between 28-35 weeks gestation.
•  Give the mother:

Medicine dexamethasone im
Codes
C  V
Adult dose  Frequency
2 doses of 12mg given
12 hours apart
Duration

Cervical ripeners/ labour initiators (Prostaglandins)
Use prostaglandins (PG) with caution in multiparous women. Excessive uterine contractions can lead to uterine rupture, particularly if the cervix is not ripe.


•  The safest and simplest method of ripening the cervix:
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration misoprostol pv  C  V  50mcg    once daily  max 1 dose misoprostol po  C  V  25mcg    2hrdy     max8doses



106

EDLIZ2020

Dosing can be repeated, PROM
Not to be used in women with previous uterine incisions

Traction method
Where no medicines are available, a size 14 Foley's catheter can be inserted through the cervix under clean conditions, and then inflated with 40ml water. By strapping to the leg under tension, gentle traction is applied.

Myometrial Stimulants (Oxytocics)
Oxytocics are used for:
•  induction of labour;
•  augmentation of labour;
•  uterine stimulation after delivery.
Use them with great caution in highly parous women before delivery and avoid use in obstructed labour. Oxytocin (for induction of labour) does not work well without rupture of the membranes. This may result in unnecessary caesarean section and/or vertical transmission of HIV.
Induction of Labour
•  Artificial rupture of membranes. If labour fails to progress, give :
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency     Duration

oxytocln iv Infusion
C V Initially 1 unit,
Then 4 units in 1L sodium chloride 0.9% at 15,
30, 60 drops per minute - until regular contractions are maintained.
If 4 units is insufficient, and it is the woman's first pregnancy:
Increase the dose stepwise with regular monitoring - 16, 32 then 64 units in the litre of sodium chloride 0.9% - each time increasing the delivery rate through 15, 30 and 60 drops per minute.
or misoprostol pv C V  50 mcg every 24 hrs (max 2 doses)
or misoprostol po C V  25 mcg every 2 hours (max 8 doses) repeat
cycle next day if cervix not favourable. Do amniotomy and oxytocin infusion if bishops score is >6

Augmentation of Labour
If membranes have already ruptured but labour is not progressing: follow the same steps and precautions as above. Obstructed labour should be considered as a cause if labour fails to progress.


Active management of the third stage of labour



107

EDLIZ2020

Medicine oxytocin im
Codes Adult dose C  V  10 units
Frequency    Duration once with the appearance of
the anterior shoulder

•  If the uterus remains relaxed OR THERE IS POST PARTUM HAEMORRHAGE in spite of above measures and manual stimulation, give:
Medicine     Codes Adult dose  Frequency Duration
oxytocin iv infusion C  V 20units in 1L of sodium chloride 0.9% running
in at 10-60 drops per minute.
or  misoprostol pr   C  V 600mcg once only

Termination of Pregnancy
Legal Conditions for Abortion:
•  where the pregnancy results from rape, whether or not the rapist is caught;
•  where continuing with pregnancy poses substantial threat to the woman's physical health or life (e.g. she suffers from very high blood pressure, diabetes or another serious medical or surgical condition);
•  where there is a significant risk, or it is known that the foetus has a serious medical condition or malformation (e.g. HIV, rubella in first trimester, or Down's Syndrome).
Recommended Methods
•  medical methods as recommended below using mifepristone/misoprostol as the first preferred option
•  manual vacuum aspiration in the first trimester with or without prior use of misoprostol
•  suction curettage in the first trimester with or without prior use of misoprostol
•  dilatation and curettage in the first trimester and early second trimester with or without prior use of misoprostol
•  cover with antibiotics where appropriate

Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration amoxicillin po     C  V  500mg   3 times a day 5 days
or  ciprofloxacin po    B  V  500mg   2 times a day 5 days and  metronidazole po    C  V  400mg   3 times a day 5days

Termination of Pregnancy


108

EDLIZ2020
First trimester (up to 12 weeks)


Cervical ripening pre instrumentation Medicine        Codes  Adult dose misoprostol pv     C  V  400mcg

Frequency
4 hours before procedure

Duration once only


Induced abortion(< 12 weeks)
Medicine       Codes
misoprostolpv   C V

Adult dose 600mcg

Frequency 12hrly

Duration
max 2 doses


Or Method 2
Medicine       Codes   Adult dose
mifepristone po   B  V   200mg
then    misoprostol      C  V   800mcg in 1-2   B, pv or SL
da's

Frequency

once once

Duration

B = buccal, SL = sub-lingual
Combination regimen (Method 2) is recommended because it is more effective.
Missed abortion
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration misoprostol pv    C  V  600mcg    12hrty      max 2 doses

Incomplete abortion
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration mlsoprostol po    C  V  600mcg    single dose
SECOND TRIMESTER (14 TO 27 WEEKS)
Induced abortion (>12 weeks)
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration misoprostol pv     C  V  200mcg    12hrly     max4doses

Or Method 2
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration mifepristone po   B  V  200mg     once

then  misoprostol      C  V  400mcg    3 hrly in 1-2  B, pv or SL
days

109

EDLIZ2020
B=buccal, SL = sub-lingual

NB: Combination regimen (Method 2) is recommended because it is more effective.
Repeat doses of misoprostol can be considered when needed to achieve success of the abortion process. Health-care providers should use caution and clinical judgement to decide the maximum number of doses of misoprostol when managing pregnant individuals with prior uterine incision. Uterine rupture though a rare complication, must be considered with advanced gestational age and therefore clinical judgement and health system preparedness for emergency management should be made available.

Intra uterine foetal death (13-17 weeks)
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
misoprostol pv   C  V  200mcg   12hrly   max 4 doses

Intra uterine foetal death (18-27weeks)
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
misoprostol pv   C  V  100mcg   12hrly   max 3 doses

Third_trimester[28-40weeks]

Intra uterine foetal death (27-43weeks)
Medicine     Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
mlsoprostol po  C  V  25mcg   2hrly    max 8 doses
or  misoprostol pv  C  V  50mcg   24hrly   max 2 doses

Induction of labour
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose Frequency Duration mlsoprostol pv    C  V  50mcg   24hrly   max 2 doses
or  misoprostol po    C  V  25 mcg  2hrly    max 8 doses

Rape and Sexual Assault: Prophylaxis against infections and pregnancy STI prophylaxis for sexual assault survivors (see STI/ART guidelines):
Survivors should be given STI prophylaxis/post exposure prophylaxis: Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
ceftriaxone im     C  V  250mg   once only
and  azithromycin po     C  V  1g     once only
or   doxycycline po     C  V  100mg   twice a day  7 days and  metronidazole po    C  V  2g     once only
or   tinidazole po       B  V  2g      once only and  benzathine penicillin   B  V  2.4MU    once only
im

110



and  tenofovir/ lamivudine, dolutegravir po
EDLIZ2020
C  V  SeeART
guidelines
Offer counselling and HIV test at the time of the rape and three months later.

Post Coital Contraception ('Morning-after pill') / Emergency Contraception

This method is particularly appropriate after rape and unprotected sexual intercourse.
•  Within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, give:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
combined oral       C  V  2 tablets   repeat after contraceptive po                  12 hours
50mcg ethinyloestradiol +
150-250mcg levonorgestrel
or   combined oral       C  V  4 tablets   repeat after
contraceptive po                  12 hours
30-35mcg ethinyloestradiol +
150-250mcg levonorgestrel
or   levonorgestrel 750mcg   C  V  1 tablet    repeat after 12 hrs
or   levonorgestrel 1.5mg    C  V  1 tablet    stat dose

Note: Advise to return if menstruation does not occur within 3 weeks. Give appropriate contraceptive advice.

MEDICINES IN PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
Note: the tables below include commonly used medicines, but the absence of a medicine from these tables does not necessarily imply no risk. Always check if unsure.
General principles
•  medicines should be prescribed during pregnancy and lactation only if the expected benefit to the mother outweighs the risk to the foetus or neonate;
• all medicines should be avoided if possible during the first trimester;
• well known medicines, which have been extensively used during pregnancy or lactation, should be used in preference to new medicines;









111

EDLIZ2020
Table 6.1: Medicines to be avoided/used with caution during
breastfeeding

Medicine           Recommendations Alcohol        Small quantities probably not harmful
Aspirin       Avoid -- risk of Reye's syndrome
Atropine       Avoid
Bromocriptine    Avoid
Carbimazole     May cause hypothyroidism in infant Chloramphenicol   May cause bone marrow toxicity in infant Diazepam I     Avoid repeated doses
Nitrazepam
Ooxycycline     Caution, although probably minimal levels in the
milk.
Ergotamine     Toxic to infant, may inhibit lactation
lithium       Monitor mother's levels carefully
Oestrogen     High level may affect milk flow Oral anti-coagulants  Caution, risk of haemorrhage Phenobarbitone   Inhibits infants sucking reflex
Radioactive iodine  Avoid breastfeeding for 24hrs after diagnostic
doses, contraindicated in therapeutic does.
Sulphonamides    Caution -- significant risk of kernicterus
Thiazides      Caution. Doses are usually too small (25-50mg) to
be harmful. Large doses may suppress lactation.

Table 6.2: Medicines to be used with caution or avoided in pregnancy
Cont]
Medicine      Trim.  Note   Rationale / advice
Albendazole      1  Avoid  Potentially teratogenic. Wait until after 2&3  Caution  delivery.
Alcohol       All  Avoid  Small quantities probably not harmful
Amitriptyline      3  Caution  Convulsions in neonate. Androgens      All  Avoid  Virilisation of female foetus.
Antiemetics     All  Caution Use promethazine or chlorpheniramine ONLY if vomiting is severe.
Antiepileplics    All  Caution Benefits outweigh risks - monitor
blood levels and adjust dose accordingly. Use single medicine if possible. See individually listed medicines.
112

EDLIZ2020
Aspirin         3  Avoid   Low dose aspirin in PIH is safe in 2 1&2  Caution  and 3.
Atenolol        3  Caution  Neonatal hypoglycaemia, bradycardia, Propranolol     1&2  Avoid  intrauterine growth retardation.
Carbimazole    2&3  Caution Refer to specialist.
Chloramphenicol    3  Caution 'Grey baby syndrome' avoid long
courses.
Ciprofloxacin     1    Avoid
2   Caution
Cotrimoxazole    All  Avoid  Risk of teratogenicity and
methemoglobinemia.
Diazepam      3  Caution Neonatal respiratory depression,
Nitrazepam            drowsiness, hypotonia. Avoid regular and prolonged use.
Doxycycline     All  Avoid  Dental discolouration, maternal
hepatotoxicity with large doses.
Ergotamine      All  Avoid
Gentamicin      All  Avoid   May cause auditory or vestibular Kanamycin              nerve damage, risk greatest with
Amikacin               streptomycin and kanamycin, small
(aminoglycosides)          with gentamicin.
Heparin      All  Caution Maternal bone demineralisation/ thrombocytopenia.
Laxatives-      All  Caution stimulant
Lithium        All  Avoid   Needs careful control of levels. Metronidazole      f  Avoid  Avoid high doses.
2&3  Caution
NSAIDS -Other    All  Avoid  Paracetamol is preferred for analgesia
in standard doses.
Opiates       3  Caution Neonatal respiratory depression, gastric stasis in mother with risk of aspiration in labour.
Oral         All  Avoid   Change to insulin. hypoglycaemics
Podophyllin      All  Avoid
Phenobarbitone   1&3  Caution Congenital malformations.
Phenytoin             Prophylactic use of vitamin K and folate is recommended.
Praziquantel       1  Avoid   Wait.


113

EDLIZ2020
Prednisolone     All  Caution If essential cover neonate for adrenal
suppression.
Pyrimethamine/     1  Avoid   Give with folic acid. Sulphadoxine    2&3  Caution

Quinine       All  Caution High doses teratogenic. Benefit outweighs risk
Reserpine       All  Avoid
Sulphonamides    3  Avoid  Risk of teratogenicity,
methemoglobinemia, kemicterus.
Streptomycin     All  Avoid  May cause auditory or vestibular
nerve damage, risk greatest with streptomycin and kanamycin.
Thiazides      All  Caution May cause neonatal thrombocytopenia. Avoid for treatmen of hypertension.
Vaccines -- live    All  Avoid
Vitamin A        1  Avoid   High dose may be teratogenic in earty pregnancy.
Warfarin        1  Avoid   Subcutaneous heparin may be
2&3  Caution substituted in the first trimester and
the last few weeks of pregnancy in
those with prosthetic heart valves, deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

PMTCT
Follow the current national guidelines.
















114

EDLIZ2020




7. SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
GENERAL NOTES                          116
URETHRAL DISCHARGE IN MEN                 116
VAGINAL DISCHARGE IN WOMEN                119
ANAL AND RECTAL INFECTIONS                 123
GENITAL ULCERS IN MEN & WOMEN (+/-BUBOES)      124
GRANULATING ULCERS WITHOUT BUBOES         126
BUBOES WITHOUT ULCERS                   126
ACUTE EPIDIDYMO-ORCHITIS                  127
SYPHILIS                               127
GENITAL WARTS (CONDYLOMATA ACUMINATE)       129
MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM                  129
PEDICULOSIS PUBIS (PUBIC LICE)               129
OPHTHALMIA NEONATORUM                   130

























115

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTE
Accurate laboratory-proven diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections (STI) is desirable but not always possible. Management guidelines recommended in this section are based on the diagnosis of STl-associated syndromes. This involves the provision of the complete management package including provision of antibiotics for the STI syndrome, provision of health education, promoting risk reduction behaviour and treatment compliance, provision of condoms, providing information on  partner referral and treatment and  arranging for follow-up examination. To prevent further spread ii is essential that all sex partners of persons  with  STI  be  contacted  and  treated.  In  addition  to  syndromic management,  recommendations for treatment of specific  infections when laboratory diagnosis has been made.


FIRST LINE therapy is recommended when the patient makes his/her first contact with the health care facility.
SECOND LINE therapy is administered when first line therapy has failed, re-infection and poortreatment compliance have been excluded, and other diagnoses have been considered.
THIRD LINE therapy should only be used when expert attention and adequate laboratory facilities are available, and where results of treatment can be monitored.
To ensure complete cure, doses less than those recommended must not be administered. The use of inadequate doses of antibiotics encourages the growth of resistant organisms, which will then be very difficult to treat.

URETHRAL DISCHARGE IN MEN
The commonest causes are  Neisseria gonorrhoeae and  Chlamydia trachomatis, and the two often co-exist. Trichomonas vagina/is also causes a urethral discharge in men. All males with urethral discharge and all women with cervicitis should be treated for both gonorrhoea and chlamydia in view of the fact that the two coexist and present with similar signs and symptoms. Any sex partners in the preceding three months should be treated presumptively for the same infections as in the index patient, and any other conditions found on examination Recent studies (2015) from Zimbabwe showed that a small proportion of men with urethral discharge have Mycoplasma genitalium.








First Line:


116

EDLIZ2020
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose     Frequency    Duration ceftriaxone im   C  V  250mg       one dose only

or   kanamycin im   C  V  2g (1g in each   one dose only
buttock)
and  doxycycline po  C  V  100mg       twice a day    7 days or   azithromycin po  C  V  1g          one dose only

•  If the patient still has a urethral discharge, or evidence of urethritis 7 days after start of treatment, suspect re-infection, poor treatment compliance or antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae. If re-infection is suspected re-start first line treatment.
Otherwise treat the patient with second line therapy or refer for investigations and laboratory guided treatment.
Second Line:
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration ceftriaxone im       C  V  500mg    one dose only
or   cefixime po         B  V  400mg    one dose only
and  metronidazole po     C  V  2g       one dose only
and  doxycycline po       C  V  100mg    twice a day   7 days
(Dependent on 1 tine Rx if 1st line Azlthromycln)

or  azlthromycln po
(if fine doxycycline)
C  V  1gstat then   3 days 500mg od
for 2 days
New evidence suggests this approach which is updated from Zimbabwe ST/ guidelines
If these medicines are not available locally, refer to the next level.



















117

EDLIZ2020


Figure 7.1: Management of Urethral Discharge in Men

Take history & examine client Urethral discharge present?
el          NO

Signs of other STis present?
Ceftriaxone 250mg single dose
or
Kanamycin 2g single dose          No
plus                             YES
Doxycycline 100mg twice a day
for 7 days, with food                   w       i
f          '

Give health education on       es  Advise     Trot
treatment, compliance, risk     on risk reduction, use
reduction, use ofcondoms.     of condoms. Advise     a0o
Ask patient to have partner(s)    to return f symptoms


log

treated
Arrange for follow-p after 7
persist
,




Urethral discharge persists?  NO
bl» sh rge pu tint
Reinforce health education
• Offer condoms

YES
•

Reinfection likely? Compliance with treatment poor?
No ..
2Mile tre tn «mt
Ceftriaxone 500 mg im stat' or Cefixime 400mg
po stat
plus
# Doxycycline 100mg twice daily or Azithromycin
1g stat

YES
plus
Metronidazole po 2g stat Offer condoms




•  If the client received ceftriaxone at the initial consultation and there is no re- infection (non-compliance does not apply here because patient will have received single dose IM injection), then the second ceftriaxone dose should be ceftriaxone 500mg im stat.
•  If kanamycin was given at the initial consultation giving ceftriaxone 500mg im stat is appropriate.
•  #depends on whether doxycycline or azithromycin given first line.




118

EDLIZ2020
VAGINAL DISCHARGE IN WOMEN
All women with a vaginal discharge must have a vaginal examination. Some vaginal discharges are normal. However, any woman concerned about a vaginal discharge should be examined and the patient managed appropriately.
All women presenting with abnormal vaginal discharge that looks like a yeast infection (curd-like discharge, redness of the vulva and vulva itching) should receive treatment for candida. All women with an abnormal vaginal discharge that is not consistent with candida should receive treatment for bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis and gonorrhoea and chlamydia.
Treatment for cervical infection both gonococcal and chlamydia/ infection should be given in situations where infection seems likely or the risk of developing complications is high. Treatment for cervical infection should be added to the treatment for vaginal infections if suspected (for example a patient's partner has urethral discharge), or if the signs of cervical infection (mucopurulent cervical discharge or easy bleeding) are seen on speculum examination.

First line treatment vaginal discharge Therapy for bacterial vaginosis
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose Frequency    Duration
metronldazole po    C  V  400mg or  3 times/day or  7 days
500mg   twice daily or   metronldazole po    C  V  2g      once only
or   clindamycin po     B  V  300mg   twice day     7 days

Therapy for Trichomoniasis if clindamycin given for BV
metronidazole po    C  V  400mgor  3 times/day or  7 days
500mg   twice daily
or   metronldazole po    C  V  2g      once only"
or   tlnidazole po#      C  V  500mg    twice daily    5 days
or   tinidazole po#      C  V  2g      once only

Likely to be less effective than longer course if HIV infected # Tinidazole not recommended in pregnancy
Avoid alcohol consumption during treatment with either Metronidazole or Tinidazole
#Defer breastfeeding by 72 hours following a single 2g dose of tinidazole
PLUS
Therapy for yeast infection if curd-like white discharge, vulvo-vaginal redness and itching are present




119

EDLIZ2020
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency    Duration miconazole pv     C  V  200mg    every night    3days
or   clotrimazole pv     C  V  100mg    every night    7 days or   nystatin pessary    C  V  200,000iu  at night      7 days
PLUS
Therapy for cervical  infection  if partner has  urethral  discharge  or mucopurulent cervicitis / easy bleeding.


Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency    Duration
ceftriaxone im     C  V  250mg    one dose only or    kanamycin im      C  V  2g [1g into  one dose only
each
buttock)
and   doxycycline po     C  V  100mg    twice a day    7 days or    azithromycin po    C  V  1g      one dose only
Second line treatment for vaginal discharge
•   If the patient still has a vaginal discharge, or evidence of cervicitis 7 days after start of treatment, suspect re-infection, poor treatment compliance or antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae. If reinfection is suspected re-start first line treatment.
•   Otherwise treat the patient with second line therapy or refer for investigations and laboratory guided treatment.
•   Second Line:
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency    Duration ceftriaxone im       C  V  500mg    one dose only
Or   cefixime po         B  V  400mg    one dose only
and  metronldazole po     C  V  400mg    three time a day 7 days and  doxycycline po      C  V  100mg    twice a day    7 days
(Dependent on 1st line Rx if 1st line Azithromycin)
Or   azithromycin po      C  V  1g       one dose only
(if 1st line doxycycline)
If these medicines are not available locally, refer to the next level.

CAUTION IN PREGNANCY: See chapter Obstetric and Gynaecological Conditions. Doxycycline should not be used during pregnancy, or in lactating women. In pregnant women chlamydia/ infection is best treated with azithromycin orerythromycin (which-ever is available) while kanamycin or ceftriaxone should be used for gonococcal infection



120

EDLIZ2020
Figure 7.2: First line management of vaginal discharge using a speculum
l        I
Tale history and ere cent including speculurn erasion Veal iscare on  ant?


vts v
v wo

Discharge is prof. yellow                    No
Sagos of
d lor ofv7          tat at of       -   ow sTm

1 Mo
0rs
we and/tor curd lit?                 Yrs
Treat tor yst infection                ..
vs      1       f"r t, o
a  7 06 vtr
gt            •  
v
lat yein a2g ogle do   Mc
Pt at ti ot oriole         or ctrto 2-0.
d.
ls
do     C  yeyel  400mg twc«
t          .......           dry fr Try
ln  yelm a             or«rtroryeh f4
he.          owly
trt    2so I        l                  .
rd

2  ,.,
l               •
7  00g                                �

fwfer«dry fer T      retrod
wore f
i 00gJr

v rt
dee ti-, off
l              v
lo              •      I  l de

ca.._.                 wwo
dry fie.6    ht  5age otoe sT7
ttt fr rv,
CM rvice
o
\                         wt of
.     vs    rt  • r«
ft



121

EDLIZ2020
ANAL AND RECTAL INFECTIONS
Anorectal symptoms and sexually transmitted anorectal infections are prevalent in men who have sex with men (MSM), in female sex workers, transgendered and heterosexual individuals who practise anal sexual intercourse.

ANATOMICAL SITES OF INFECTION
Infections of the ano-rectal region can be divided into the following anatomical sites.
•  Anal infections: infections of the external anus and anal canal, involving the stratified squamous epithelium -- a common site for pathogens such as the human papillomavirus (HPV), herpes simplex virus (HSV) and syphilis;
•  Proctltis: infections from the dentate line to the rectosigmoid junction - a common site for gonococcal and chlamydia! infections and HSV (the dentate line is the line between the simple columnar epithelium of the rectum and the stratified epithelium of the anal canal, usually defined as being at the level of the anal valves;
•  Proctocolitls: infections of the rectum and colon --a common site for
Shigella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, cytomegalovirus and amoebiasis.

For syndromic diagnosis and management, these infections can be grouped under anorectal infections. Anorectal infections may be associated with anorectal pain, itching, discharge, bleeding, sensation of rectal fullness, tenesmus, constipation, and mucus streaking of stools. However, more frequently, ano-rectal infections tend to be asymptomatic.

An examination for anal infections includes an external examination of the anus and a proctoscopy examination. In the absence of a proctoscope, as is the case in most primary point-of-care settings, an external examination of the anus may be the only practical procedure to observe a discharge, ulcers or external warts.

If painful perianal ulcers are reported and observed, or mucosal ulcers are noted on proctoscopy, treatment should include a regimen for genital herpes and syphilis as if following the genital ulcer disease (GUO) flowchart. If ulcers persist, LGV must be considered and managed accordingly.

Thus, in implementing a flowchart for the management of anorectal infections, the following should be taken into consideration.
(a) identification of persons at risk,


122

EDLIZ2020
(b) identification of risk behaviours for rectal infection in persons at risk,
(c) proctoscopy skills (and availability of a proctoscope),
(d) differentiation between anorectal infection and other pathology,
(e) entry points for the management protocol, and
(f) thresholds for adding treatment for HSV, LGV or syphilis.
Treatment recommendations for ano-rectal infections
Figure 6.3 guides through the management process for persons practising anal sex, be they heterosexual or MSM. The choice of medicines, dosage and duration of treatment are, in general, not different from those for infections at other anatomical sites.
Figure 7.3: First line management of anal discharge
Anorectal infections













• h  w
·fed vs
·fed
r
• add
·folio«r'I   ,

:.--•
w' eetra't
lent'
gt
• pre
«






• fed a
+ Garg
erg
+ ed ode do
►--
•
There have been no evaluations conducted to determine the specificity or sensitivity of the anorectal flowchart Where possible. it should be implemented as pant of operational research to determine its performance. As the entry point for this flowchart is sexual behaviour rather than symptoms, it is likely that a number of patients wi repeatedly be treated for infections
123

EDLIZ2020
GENITAL ULCERS IN MEN & WOMEN (WITH OR WITHOUT BUBOES)

The commonest cause of genital ulcers in both men and women is genital herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV2) infection. Syphilis and chancroid also cause genital ulcers but the prevalence of chancroid is low in Zimbabwe. Clinical differentiation between the causes of genital ulcers is inaccurate except if the patient gives a clear history of recurrent attacks of vesicular lesions that may crust and heal spontaneously or if the clinical appearance of the lesions are those of superficial ulcers, when the diagnosis of genital herpes may be suspected. It should be noted that syphilis may remain undetected in the body for long periods of lime and clinical manifestations may only occur when long- term complications develop. Syphilis should be ruled out in all patients presenting with genital ulcers. lmmunosuppressed persons with HIV infection frequently develop attacks of genital herpes that produce lesions which tend to persist and require treatment with antiviral medicines, such as acyclovir. Hence it is important to bear in mind all these three diagnoses whenever managing persons with genital ulcers syndromically.
Treatment of genital ulcers:
Advice on local hygiene such as washing the ulcer twice a day with salt water (1 teaspoon salt to 1 litre water) and give the following:

Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzathine penicillin im C  V  2.4MU    once only
(1.44gm)
and  ciprofloxacln po     B  V   500mg    twice a day  3 days and  acyclovir po       C  V   400mg    three times  5 days
a day
Or  acyclovir po       C  V   800mg    twice a day  5 days If treating Primary Genital Herpes

acyclovir po       C  V   400mg   three times  10 days
a day
or   acyclovir po       C  V   200mg    five times a 10 days
day

In case of penicillin allergy, use doxycycline 100mg twice a day for 20 days
CAUTION IN PREGNANCY: see chapter on Obstetric and Gynaecological Conditions. Ciprofloxacin should not be used during pregnancy or in lactating mothers. In pregnant women genital ulcers are best treated with erythromycin 500mg four times a dayfor 7 days or Azithromycin 1g single dose orceftriaxone 250mg IM single dose. Women who are penicillin allergic should be treated with


124

EDLIZ2020
erythromycin 500mg four times a day for 14 days or 30 days depending on stage ofsyphilis (less than 2yrs or more than 2yrs)


Note: In an individual with primary genital herpes ulcers, the lesions tend to be more severe (usually accompanied by systemic illness such as fever, headaches, myalgia), with eruptions lasting up to 3 weeks. For this reason, primary genital herpes is treated for 10 days, and not for 5 days as with recurrent genital herpes.


Figure 7.3: Management of Genital Ulcers: First Line













mt+oowowe frAm us me+o
·ft d on
·bwv4%lg
hoe d ant t do
·f  r de
led







ttw   deg tot htl hi tdrlet
pt
·fed et
Gard vL et t
]·   at.wt veer


ertee'



·Dart
·let ctndpt
zu  radio
Pucandmadpod

_d






ptenter's
·i taest








125
it tetlj n tr

EDLIZ2020
GRANULATING ULCERS WITHOUT BUBOES
These are most likely to be lesions of granuloma inguinale, a condition also known as Donovanosis and caused by Calymmalobacterium granulomatis. II should be remembered that persons who are immunosuppressed may not develop a bubo and occasionally persistent genital ulcers without bubo formation  may  occur  as  a  result  of  chancroid  in  persons  with immunosuppression and HIV infection.
First line:

Medicine        Codes
benzathine penicillin im C V
Adult dose Frequency Duration
2.4MU   one dose only
(1.44g)

and  azithromycin po


or  doxycycline po


•  or, in penicillin allergy
Medicine erythromycin po
C  V  1g     once only followed by 500mg daily until ulcer healed'
C V  100mg  twice a day until ulcer is healed


Codes Adult dose Frequency  Duration C  V  500mg  4 times a day 14 days

• review patients on a weekly basis


Second line:
Medicine cotrimoxazole po

Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration

C  V  960mg   twice a day until ulcer is
healed
BUBOES WITHOUT ULCERS
This usually occurs in persons with lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) which is caused by the L-types of Chlamydia trachomatis. The main effect of the infection is on the lymphatics and patients may present with penile and vulval lymphoedema together with inguinal buboes. Rectal LGV infection can also present with anal discharge and may be confused with inflammatory bowel disease. A small transient genital ulcer, which may heal on its own, may precede the swelling and buboes. The bubo is typically multilocular and may be grooved by the inguinal ligament.


First Line:
Medicine doxycycline po

Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C  V  100mg   twice a day  21 days




126

EDLIZ2020
Second line, or in pregnant women:
Medicine         Codes   Adult dose
erythromycin po     C  V    500mg



Frequency 4 times a day



Duration 21 days


ACUTE EPIDIDYMO-ORCHITIS
Acute scrotal swelling may occur in persons with acute epididymo-orchitis, testicular torsion and scrotal trauma, and in those with irreducible or strangulated inguinal hernia. Patients should be examined carefully in order to exclude these conditions. If patients do not respond to first line therapy, they should be referred for further investigations.
First Line:
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  Duration ceftriaxone im  C  V  250mg     one dose only
or   kanamycin im  C  V  2g  (1g  into one dose only
each buttock]
and  doxycycllne po  C  V  100mg     twice a day  10 days

or   erythromycln po C  V  500mg     four times a  14 days
day

SYPHILIS
Early Syphilis
Includes primary, secondary and latent syphilis of less than 2 years duration:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzathlne penlclllln Im C  V   1.44g (2.4 MU) one dose only
or   doxycycline po (in    C  V   100mg   twice a day  14 days penicillin allergy)
or   erythromycin po     C  V   500mg    4 times a   14 days
day

Late Syphilis and syphilis during pregnancy
Includes latent syphilis of more than 2 years duration, latent neurosyphilis, gummatous, cardiovascular & neurosyphilis, and syphilis of unknown duration:

Medicine          Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration benzathine penicillin im C  V   1.44g    once a week  3 doses
(2.4MU)
or   doxycycline po (in   C  V   100mg   twice daily   30 days penicillin allergy NOT
pregnancy)

127



or  erythromycin po (in pregnancy)
EDLIZ2020
C  V  500mg   4 times a  30 days
day
• Pregnant women are now routinely tested for syphilis using a rapid diagnostic kit (TPHA equivalent). Pregnant women with syphilis require close surveillance especially, to identify re-infection after treatment.
• Partner Treatment: Note the importance of having sex partner treated, therefore always provide Contact Tracing Slip.
• Babies born to women found to have syphilis during pregnancy should be treated even if the mother had been adequately treated during pregnancy:

Treatment for babies born to mothers with syphilis

Medicine
benzathine penicillin Im
Codes Paed dose
C V 30rng/kg
[=50 000u/kg]
Frequency  Duration one dose only


Congenital Syphilis (babies clinically infected):
Medicine        Codes  Paed dose   Frequency  Duration benzathine penicillin im C  V  50,000 u/kg  one weekly 3 weeks
[30mg/kg]
or  procaine penicillin im  C  V  50mg/kg    once a day  10 days
[=50 000u/kg]
or  erythromycin po (in   C  V  12.5mg/kg  4 times a day 10 days penicillin allergy)


Neurosyphilis:
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzyl penicillin iv     C  V  1.8-2.4g    four hourly  2 weeks
or   benzathine penicillin im C  V 2.4MU     one weekly  3 weeks
or   procaine penicillin im   C  V 600mg [=1ml  once a day  21 days
in each buttock)
or   doxycycline po      C  V 200mg     twice a day  30 days or   erythromycin po (in    C  V 500mg     4 times a   30 days
penicillin allergic                  day
pregnant women)
and  prednisolone po      B  V 40mg      once daily  three days
starting 24 hours before other treatment




128

EDLIZ2020
GENITAL WARTS (CONDYLOMATA ACUMINATA)
•  External, Genital, Perianal:
Medicine    Codes   Adult dose     Frequency  Duration
podophyllin paint   B  N   wash off after 4  once a week  review
20%                 hrs

imiquimod 5%
cream
B N  apply at bedtime  three limes a  max 4 and leave       week   months overnight
trichloroacetic     B  N   apply with a stick  once a week acid                 to warts only
CAUTIONS: For external use only. Do NOTuse podophyllin in pregnancy. Do not apply to the cervix, urethra or anal mucosa. Do not use imiquimod cream for genital warts on children under 12 years
Ifpatient fails to respond, refer for cryotherapy
•  Cervical, urethral, rectal and vaginal warts:
Do not use podophyllin. Treat by cryotherapy, electro-cautery, or by surgical excision.
If the lesions are very extensive and large then the patient should be offered HIV testing and counselling, referred to the 01 Clinic or for specialist attention.

MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM
The lesions of molluscum contagiosum may resolve spontaneously. In most instances, they do not have to be treated unless cosmetically unacceptable. If not acceptable, each lesion should be pricked with a sharpened "orange-stick' or needle and the contents of the lesion expressed. This alone may be sufficient, or each lesion can then be touched carefully with liquefied phenol. Referral for cryotherapy is also an option.
Lesions of molluscum contagiosum may become extensive and large in immunosuppressed persons with HIV infection. If the lesions are very extensive and are very large then the patient should be offered HIV testing and counselling, referred to the OI Clinic or for specialist attention.
PEDICULOSIS PUBIS {PUBIC LICE)
Patients with pediculosis pubis and their sexual partners should be treated as follows
Medicine      Codes Adult dose      Frequency   Duration

permelhrin 5%
cream
C  N  apply to infested and reapply after 7
adjacent hairy areas. days if
Wash off after 10   necessary minutes



129



or  benzyl benzoate 25% emulsion [irritant]
EDLIZ2020
B  N  apply to infested and once  at adjacent hairy areas. night
wash off
next morning

'Dilute with one part water (1:1) for children.
*Dilute with three parts water (1.3) for infants.
Note: apply to hairy areas, do not shave.
repeat treatment after no more than 10
da s.


Second line therapy
Medicine             Codes  Adult dose  Frequency
ation
gamma benzene hexachloride 1%  C  V  wash off  reapply 7 to 10 lotion                 after 24hrs  days tater to kill
hatched lice.


Dur
Caution: Do not use G.B.Hin pregnancy and lactation - refer mothers to district level for
benzyl benzoate.

OPHTHALMIA NEONATORUM
This is defined as conjunctivitis with discharge occurring in a neonate within the first month of life. The condition is commonly caused by gonococcal, chlamydial and bacterial infection. The condition is preventable by detecting and treating maternal gonococcal and chlamydial infection during pregnancy and by instilling 1% tetracycline eye ointment carefully into the conjunctiva! sacs of every baby as soon as possible after birth.
Ophthalmia Neonatorum is treated as follows:
Medicine      Codes  Paed dose  Frequency  Duration ceftrlaxone Im   C  V  50mg/kgto  once    single dose
max of 125mg
or  kanamycln Im   C  V  25mg/kg to a once   single dose
max of 75mg
Treat the parents and the baby for gonococcal and chlamydia! infection as described above. Also provide health education and counselling to the parents.


Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
See chapter Obstetrics & Gynaecology





130

EDLIZ2020


8. HIV RELATED DISEASE
GENERAL GUIDELINES                      132
CLINICAL PRESENTATION                   132
GENERAL NOTES                         132
COTRIMOXAZOLE PROPHYLAXIS:              133
PERSISTENT GENERALISED LYMPHADENOPATHY   137
ORAL AND OESOPHAGEAL CANDIDIASIS (THRUSH)   137
DIARRHOEA - ACUTE                       138
DIARRHOEA - CHRONIC                    138
WASTING SYNDROME (SLIM DISEASE)           139
RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS                 139
HEADACHE & PROBLEMS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  141
HEADACHE AND MENINGITIS                 141
AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX                  145
HIV RELATED SKIN CONDITIONS               145
HERPES ZOSTER (SHINGLES)                146
POST-HERPETIC NEURALGIA                 147
FoLLuLTIS                            147
HERPES SIMPLEX                        147
SEBORRHEIC DERMATITIS                  148
PRURIGO OR PAPULAR PRURITIC DERMATOSES    148
MEDICINE REACTIONS                     149
KAPOSI'S SARCOMA                      150














131

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL GUIDELINES

These guidelines aim to encourage a consistent clinical management approach and draw a balance between possible interventions and available resources. Further information is available in the Guidelines for Antiretroviral Therapy in Zimbabwe. Always refer to the latest edition of these guidelines.

Clinical presentation
Clinical presentation in HIV infection varies greatly, from asymptomatic infection in a normal, fit individual to life threatening conditions. Most infected persons remain healthy for a varying period, often many years, but may transmit the virus to others during unprotected sex.

General Notes
All patients should be offered HIV counselling and testing services (HTS). A documented proof of a positive HIV test result should be availed before a patient is enrolled into the Chronic HIV Care program.
For notes on the management of HIV infection and related conditions in children, see also "Paediatric HIV Infections'.
The goal is to provide the earliest possible diagnosis of HIV infection, diagnose opportunistic infections (Ols) promptly and implement therapeutic measures that will extend and improve the quality of life. Please refer to the Guidelines for Antiretroviral Therapy in Zimbabwe for more detail about how to deal with Ols and how to use the ARVs. Most early problems can be adequately and effectively treated so that the HIV infected persons continue to lead a normal and productive life. A continuum of care should be provided from the nearest possible facility to the home or workplace.
If a patient presents at the primary care level ("C level") or district hospital ("B level"), follow EDLIZ as far as possible, then refer to the next level if need be. Keep referrals to a minimum and only where essential for investigations requiring specialised facilities and specialist advice. Check where your nearest O1/ART Clinic is.
The following are fundamental to the management of HIV related illness, but cannot be covered fully here:
• Counselling: pre-testing, post-test, crisis/support;
• Health education for prevention of further transmission of HIV,and positive living;
• Maintenance of good nutrition, vitamin and mineral supplements.
•  Prevention, diagnosis and treatment of Ols
•  Use of antiretroviral medicines


132

EDLIZ2020
Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis:
Cotrimoxazole  (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole)  prophylaxis  provides protection against some but not all severe bacterial infections and has been shown to prolong life and reduce hospital admissions.
Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis should be given to the following:
•  All patients with WHO clinical stages 2, 3, and 4 disease
•  All patients with CD4 counts equal or less than 350 cells/mm³
•  Pregnant women with CD4 counts equal or less than 350 cells/mm3
•  All children born to HIV-positive mothers from six weeks of age until they are tested and confirmed to be HIV negative
•  Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis should be started as soon as any of the above conditions are suspected; this should be done at every entry point and not just be left to the 01 clinics.
•  Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis must be stopped when patients become clinically stable and are virally suppressed below 1000 copies/ml for those patients who have been on ART for at least 6 months


Medicine

cotrimoxazole po
Codes Adult  Frequency Duration dose
C V  960mg once a day  until CD4>350 cells/mm' for 6
months with ARVs or VL is less than 1000 copies per ml for at least 6 months

Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis in children
Give once daily orally according to the following table.
Table 8.1 Cotrimoxazole Prophylaxis in Children

Age            Dose (ml)

Suspension       Paediatric tablets
(240 mg/ 5 ml)      (120 mg)
up to 6 months        2.5             1
6 months to 3 years     5              2
Over 3 years         10             4
133

EDLIZ2020


Give cotrimoxazole for the duration of the paediatric life
If allergic to cotrimoxazole, try desensitization
Consider using Dapsone or desensitization. Desensitization can be offered rapidly or over a longer period of time. Do not desensitize anyone who has had an anaphylactic reaction to cotrimoxazole or a severe skin rash such as Stevens.Johnson syndrome

TB PREVENTIVE THERAPY {TPT):
Approximately 5-15% of adults with latent TB infection (LTBI) develop active TB disease during their life. Provision of preventive treatment has proven itself as an effective intervention to avert the development of active TB disease, with efficacy ranging from 60% to 90%. The likelihood of progression of TB  infection  to active disease depends on  bacterial,  host,  and environmental factors. In high TB prevalence and resource-limited settings such as Zimbabwe, the following four target populations are recommended for preventive treatment: (1) people living with HIV, (2) children less than five years of age, who are household contacts of bacteriologically confirmed pulmonary TB cases, (3) all household contacts of bacteriologically confirmed pulmonary TB cases with TB infection and (4) clinical risk groups (such as patients initiating anti-tumor necrosis factor [TNF] treatment, receiving dialysis, preparing for solid organ or bone marrow transplants and those with silicosis).
HIV infection is the strongest risk factor associated with the development of active TB, with up to 40% of patients progressing to TB disease after exposure. Treatment of LTBI in people living with HIV (PLHIV) reduces the risk of TB disease development by up to 35% and plays a synergistic role in further risk reduction when used with antiretroviral therapy (ART). Children less than five years old are a particularly vulnerable population due to their higher risk of progressing to active TB disease and their greater risk of developing more severe forms of TB (including TB  meningitis and disseminated TB), in addition to the difficulty of confirming the diagnosis, given the paucibacillary nature of their disease. Together, these factors result in high TB-associated child morbidity and mortality. As diagnosing active TB disease in young children is a challenge, averting new paediatric TB cases by delivering preventive treatment is of strategic importance to decrease the overall burden of paediatric TB disease.
People living with HIV are 20 to 37 times more likely to develop active TB from LTBI than those without HIV, making HIV infection the strongest risk factor for TB disease. TB is responsible for more than a quarter of deaths of people living with HIV. IPT has been shown to reduce the incidence of TB in HIV-infected people with LTBI by 33-62%.


134

EDLIZ2020
Among PLHIV, TPT is likely to provide protection against the risk of developing TB by decreasing the risks of:
• Progression of recent infection
• Reactivation of latent M. Tuberculosis
In addition, TPT programs decrease the rate of TB in the community and improve TB control.
Inclusion Criteria for Children

1.  Negative TB screening (no current cough, no fever, good weight gain) or evaluation found no active TB.
And child fits into one of the following categories:
i.   Routinely: All HIV exposed and HIV infected children between the ages of 12 and 15 years, regardless of contact history
ii.   After any contact with TB: All HIV exposed; HIV infected children above 15yrs and HIV uninfected children less than 5yrs having had contact with any case of TB
iii.  Post TB treatment: All HIV exposed and HIV infected children
<15 years of age immediately following the successful completion of TB treatment.
2.  Caregiver demonstrates a good understanding of TPT and no known risk factors for poor adherence are identified.

NB: Investigations for TB should be done according to national guidelines.

Inclusion Criteria for Adults and Adolescents including Pregnant Women(215 years);

1.  ALL CONFIRMED HIV INFECTED ADULTS who are:
•   On ART for more than 3 months or
•  Post TB treatment (immediately following the successful completion of TB treatment).
•  Contacts of PTB
•   No signs or symptoms of TB (Based on adult TB Screening guidelines)

Tuberculosis Screening Tool

/.   Does the patient have any of the following
a. Current cough ( if HIV+} or cough of greater than 1-
2 weeks?
b. Fever
c. Night sweating

135

EDLIZ2020
d. Loss of weight (>10%) or a BMI of less than 17Kg/m2
II.   CXR for TB High Risk Groups if available
Ill.   Collect a sputum specimen for Xpert MTB/Rif assay (GeneXpert) for any person who has one or more or the above symptoms or an abnormal CXR.
•   No signs or symptoms of Tuberculosis (Based on the adult TB screening criteria)
•   Good understanding of TPT and willingness to adhere

Dosages for lsoniazid:
•  The recommended dose of INH in adults and adolescents is
5mg/kg/day to a maximum of 300mg/day.
•   The recommended dose of INH in children is 10mg/kg/day (with a daily maximum dosage not supposed to exceed 300mg). Refer to the table below for guidance on the recommended weight bands versus INH to be administered:
•  INH and Rifampicin can be used for TPT in children
•  All patients on TPT must be given pyridoxine

Table 8.2: Dosage of lsoniazid per weight


Weight    Number of 100mg tablets of lNH to be administered per dose (total dose
Dose







Table 8.3 Three months of daily rifampicin and isoniazid preventive therapy (RH 75/50) for children

Weight bands               Number of Tablets
RH 75/50 mg
4-7.9kg                   1
8-11.9 kg                  2
12-15.9kg                 3
16-24.9 kg                 4




136

EDLIZ2020
Table 8.4 Supplemental pyridoxine for children

Weight bands        Number of tablets of pvridoxine 50ma
1-13.9kg                 ¼
14-24.9kg                 ½
2 25kg         Go to adult dosages and preparations

Pyridoxine dosage for adults and children:

Adults: pyridoxine (vitamin B6): 25mg/day Children: pyridoxine 25mg/day
Note: Liver toxicity symptoms should be apparent e.g. any one on TPT who develops poor appetite, nausea, or vomiting should be assumed to have liver toxicity until proven otherwise and should be referred to hospital for same day admission to investigate possible liver toxicity

HIV RELATED PERSISTENT GENERALISED LYMPHADENOPATHY (PGL)
DEFINITION: Lymph nodes >1.5 cm in two or more areas, not due to another cause such as TB and persisting for 1 month or more.
No treatment is required, but exclude other causes of PGL, particularly TB, Kaposi's Sarcoma, lymphomas or syphilis.
HIV Related Oral and Oesophageal Candidiasis (Thrush) -
(Refer to Chapter on Common Oral Conditions)
Candida infections are commonly encountered in patients with HIV infection. Oral thrush may precede AIDS but is a sign of waning immunity that signals the development of AIDS. Oesophageal thrush is an indicator of more severe cellular immunodeficiency.
CAUTION: Neither of these conditions occur exclusively in patients with HIV infection. For example, oral thrush may follow treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics or steroids or be associated with any other debilitating disease.









137

EDLIZ2020
HIV RELATED DIARRHOEA - ACUTE
DEFINITION: Three or more liquid stools daily for 2 to 14 days in patients with symptomatic HIV infection.
Management of diarrhoea should be broadly along the same lines as that described in the chapter on Gastrointestinal Conditions.
Note: Anti-diarrhoeals should NOT be used in the initial treatment of acute diarrhoea, especially in children or with bloody diarrhoea cases
If there is no improvement after 5 days, attempt to identify pathogen through stool microscopy, culture and sensitivity tests then treat according to the result.
HIV Related Diarrhoea - Chronic
DEFINITION:  Three or more liquid stools daily continuously or episodically for more than 1 month in patients with symptomatic HIV infection.
Management
• Assess  for  dehydration,  malnutrition,  and  check  electrolytes  for hypokalaemia.
• Rehydrate as required, maintain nutrition.
• Initially treat diarrhoea with blood in stool and/or fever as acute diarrhoea.
•  If  diarrhoea  (without  blood/fever)  continues  after  conservative management for 14 days, and exclusion of common causes of acute diarrhoea, symptomatic anti-diarrhoeal treatment may be appropriate:

Medicine       Codes  Adult dose    Frequency   Duration loperamlde po    C  N  4mg stat, then   as needed   review
2mg after every loose stool
or   codeine phosphate  B  V  30-60mg    <4times a day  7 days po

CAUTION: Only use the above agents if diarrhoea is disabling. Before constipating agents are given, rule out helminth infestation.
• If diarrhoea continues or recurs within 3 weeks, and no pathogen is identified, repeat microscopy and C/S.
• If there is weight loss investigate for concurrent disseminated TB with CXR and stool for AAFBS
In cases of diarrhoea with fever, bloody and/or mucus; ensure Culture and sensitivity testing is conducted.



138


• If no diagnosis:
Medicine
EDLIZ2020


Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration
ciprofloxacin po  B  V  500mg   twice a day   7 days


• If no improvement OR very ill/toxic admit to hospital for iv fluids and: Medicine       Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  uration ciprofloxacin po   B  V   500mg    twice a day  7 days
and  ceftriaxone iv    C  V  1g      twice a day  maximum 7
days
If bloody diarrhoea:
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency   Duration ciprofloxacin po   B  V  500mg   twice a day   5 days


HIV RELATED WASTING SYNDROME (SLIM DISEASE)

DEFINITION: Weight loss of more than 10%, plus either unexplained chronic diarrhea for more than one month, or unexplained prolonged fever for more than one month. This places the patient in WHO Clinical Stage 4 HIV disease and hence patient should be considered forART.
• It is important to exclude treatable conditions, especially TB, and to treat them appropriately. A chest Xray is mandatory.
• Emaciation: encourage a high calorie and protein diet. Add mineral and vitamin supplementation:
Medicine       Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration nicotinamide po    B  E  50mg    once a day review
and  pyridoxine po      B  E  25-50mg   once a day  review and  thiamine po       A  N  50mg    once a day  review
Further Management
•  Treat according to results of investigations. Keep referrals to a minimum and refer only if alternative diagnosis is suspected e.g. malabsorption.
•  Initiate antiretroviral therapy or switch ART medication if there is treatment failure






139

EDLIZ2020
HIV RELATED RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS
A multitude of different manifestations of respiratory complications may occur in patients with HIV infection. These include bacterial pneumonias, pulmonary tuberculosis, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP) and pulmonary Kaposi's sarcoma. All HIV infected patients should be screened for TB at every visit using the standard TB screening tools.
Management depends on the severity of the condition, location and mobility of the patient. Outpatient management in adults is preferred wherever possible. Only severe cases requiring investigations and inpatient admission should be referred for admission.
Treat initially as for other respiratory conditions. For acute infection (less than 2 weeks) that does not warrant admission:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration amoxlclllln po     C    V  500mg   3 times a day  7 days
or    erythromycin po (in  C    V  500mg   4 times a   7 days penicillin allergy)                day
or    doxycycline po (in   C    V  100mg   twice a day   7 days penicillin allergy)

If severe symptoms i.e.  respiratory distress, cyanosis, tachycardia, hypotension or altered mental state, consider admission:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  Duration ceftriaxone iv    C     V   '1g      bd      7days
Use 2gm BD iv if there are features of septicaemia-low BP tachycardia
or meningitis
A stat dose may be given at primary care level prior to transfer. Note: Switch to oral amoxicillin lo complete the course
If there is no response, get a chest x-ray and follow management guidelines in the chapter on respiratory conditions.
Then start on prophylactic cotrimoxazole:
Medicine       Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
cotrimoxazole po   C  V  960mg   once a day  until C04 >350
or viral load <
1000

PNEUMOCYSTIS JIROVECI PNEUMONIA (PCP)
An opportunistic infection caused by Pneumocystisjiroveci. Patients present with progressive shortness of breath and possibly cyanosis with few or no chest signs.
•  Manage with:

140

EDLIZ2020

Medicine cotrimoxazole po
Codes
C  V
Adult dose Frequency  Duration 1920mg  3 limes a day 21 days
(4 tabs)

For infant or child over 1 month: 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for 21 days. Total daily dose may alternatively be given in 3-4 divided doses orally.
If they are allergic, try cotrimoxazole desensitisation


•  or in sulphonamide allergy:
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration clindamycin po   B   V  450-600mg 6hourly   coays
and  primaquine po   C    V   30mg    once a day
•  If any tachypnoea or cyanosis is present, add:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose Frequency  Duration prednisolone po  B    V   40mg    twice a day  5 days
then  prednlsolone po   B    V   40mg    once a day  5 days then  prednlsolone po   B    V   20mg    once a day  11 days
High flow oxygen and nursed propped up are key in treatment of severe PCP
After PCP has been treated give cotrimoxazole prophylaxis until immunity is restored. (Follow current ART Guidelines). This also applies to any other patients with AIDS defining disease.
•  If still no response, consider malignancy, for example, Kaposi's sarcoma.

HIV RELATED HEADACHE AND PROBLEMS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The symptom of headache is commonly encountered in patients with HIV infection. Careful evaluation and follow up is required to exclude meningitis and other CNS infections. Rule out a serum cryptococcal antigenaemia (CrAg) especially is CD4 count is less than 100. If CrAg positive refer for lumbar puncture (LP). Also refer for LP if the headache is associated with fever, vomiting, neck stiffness, seizures, confusion as all these are "danger" symptoms and signs. Also refer to Section on Neurological Conditions
Other commonly encountered neurological conditions in HIV infection include AIDS dementia complex, peripheral neuropathy, Guillan-Barr~ syndrome, facial nerve palsy and stroke.





141

EDLIZ2020
TREATMENT OF CRYPTOCOCCAL MENINGITIS
Cryptococcal meningitis is caused by Cryptococcus neoformans. It is less acute in onset than bacterial meningitis and may occur as part of the Immune Reconstitution Syndrome (IRIS). Diagnosis is confirmed by India Ink Stain and cryptococcal antigen tests (CrAg) in the cerebrospinal fluid after LP. Treatment of cryptococcal disease must be with amphotericin B based regimens. Ideally amphotericin B must be combined with flucytosine. However, combination therapy with amphotericin B and fluconazole is recommended  as  flucytosine  is  not  available.  In  the  absence  of amphotericin B, high dose fluconazole can be used as an alternative therapy. Amphotericin B and fluconazole therapy is characterised by a 2- week induction phase, followed by 8 weeks consolidation phase and a maintenance  therapy  which  is  continued  until  adequate  immune reconstitution is achieved.
Diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis is based on either LP positive CSF CrAg /India Ink stain or positive serum CrAg plus headache or relevant symptoms
Pay attention to raised CSF pressure management and monitoring of renal function as per the Consolidated ART Guidelines.
Medicine       Codes  Adult     Frequency  Duration dose
amphotericin B iv   B  V  0.7mg/kg  once a day  2 weeks
(infusion)
Give KC/ 1.2g PO BO, and MMT 500mg PO BD to prevent hypokalaemia and
hypomagnaesemia

plus  fluconazole po then  fluconazole po then  fluconazole po









If flucytosine is available:
B  V  1200mg  once a day  2 weeks
B  V  800mg   once a day  8weeks
B  V  200mg  once a day until C04 count
for at least > 200 cells/mm3 one year.   for 6
months andVL less than 1000c0pi es per ml for 6months

Medicine amphotericin B Iv (Infusion)
Give KC/ 1.2g PO BO, and MMT 500mg PO BD to prevent hypokalaemia and hypomagnaesemia
Codes
8  V
Adult dose 1mg/Kg
Frequency once a day
Duration
1 weeks
142

EDLIZ2020
plus  flucytosine po    B  V  100mg/kg    divided into  1 weeks
four doses
then  fluconazole     B  V  1200mg     once a day  1 weeks [paeds; adolescence]     12mg/kg/day;
max 800mg/day
then  fluconazole po    B  V  800mg      once a day  8 weeks
then  fluconazole po    B  V  200mg     once a day until CD4 count
for at least >200 cells/mm3 one year.  for6 months
and VL less than 1000copies per ml for 6monlhs

If Amphotericin B IV is not available:

Medicine    Codes  Adult   Frequency  Duration dose
fluconazole po  B  V  1200 mg  once a day  2 weeks then fluconazole po  B  V  800mg  once a day  8 weeks
then fluconazole po  B  V  200mg  once a day  until CD4 count
for at least >200 cells/mm3 for 6 one year  months and VL less than
1000copies per ml.


For neonate, infant or child initial test dose of Amphotericin B 100 micrograms/kg (maximum 1 mg) included as part of first dose, then 250 micrograms/kg daily, gradually increased up to 1 mg/kg daily (maximum of 1.5 mg/kg daily). Prolonged treatment is usually necessary.
If treatment is interrupted for longer than 7 days, recommence at 250 micrograms/kg daily and increase gradually.
Then:
Neonate under 2 weeks

Medicine fluconazole po
Neonate 2-4 weeks
Medicine fluconazole po
Codes  Dose     Frequency
B  V  612mg/kg  every 72 hours


Codes  Dose     Frequency
B  V  6-12mg/kg  every 48 hours


Infant or Child
Medicine fluconazole po

Codes  Dose
B V 6-12mg/kg

Frequency
(maximum 800 mg) daily

Treatment should continue according to response and should be for at least 8 weeks for cryptococcal meningitis.


143

EDLIZ2020
Management of Raised lntracranial Pressure (ICP)
Mortality  and  morbidity from  cryptococcal  meningitis  are  high  with  a significant  proportion  attributable to  raised  intracranial  pressure  (ICP). Clinical features of raised intracranial pressure include headache, nausea & vomiting, reduced vision or hearing, change in mental status or reduced level of consciousness, seizures, 6th cranial nerve palsy or other focal neurology.

Management of raised ICP is critical to ensure good clinical outcomes. CSF pressure can be measured using a CSF manometer or improvisation using an IV fluid tubing and a ruler or tap measure. If the ICP is > 20cm of water, remove maximum 20-25ml of CSF using daily therapeutic LPs until the CSF pressure is less than 20cm or half the baseline pressure if this was extremely high. The LP might need to be repeated more than once a day if the CSF pressure is grossly elevated and symptoms recur quickly despite the initial therapeutic LP on a given day. If the CSF pressure cannot be measured then take off a maximum of 20mls CSF.

Management of Amphotericin B associated toxicities

Liposomal  amphotericin  B  has  less  renal  toxicities.  Amphotericin  B deoxycholate is associated with renal tubular toxicities and can lead to electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia. It can also result in anaemia and administration related febrile reactions.
•   Amphotericin B is often provided as a powder and should be mixed with 5% dextrose water. It should NEVER be mixed with normal saline or half normal saline as this will result in precipitation of the amphotericin B. To minimize renal toxicities, amphotericin B must be administered slowly over 4 hours. Initial therapeutic doses should be given as Amphotericin B 0.7-1mg/kg/day.
•   For adults, pre-hydration with 1000ml (1L) of normal saline with 20mEq of potassium chloride over 2 hours is recommended based on the volume status of the patient. Patients must receive oral potassium supplementation such  as  1200mg  twice a day.  The potassium supplementation minimizes the extent of hypokalemia  that  can develop. Where available supplementation with magnesium trisilicate 500mg orally twice daily is also recommended.
•   Renal function must be monitored at baseline. U&Es should be measured twice weekly and abnormal results repeated daily until they normalize. Amphotericin B should be discontinued if renal toxicity is noted but can be restarted at a reduced dosage if the U &Es are improving

If potassium is less than 3.3mmol/L increase oral KCL to 600-1200mg three times daily and monitor U& Es daily. If potassium levels do not increase

144

EDLIZ2020
despite oral potassium replacement, this may be due to low magnesium levels therefore consider measuring magnesium levels and replenishing magnesium if necessary. If the creatinine increases (which is already too late and should be avoided), a dose of amphotericin B can be omitted, and pre- hydration increased to 1L of normal saline every 8 hours and creatinine rechecked. If creatinine normalises, pre-hydrate with 1L normal saline with 20mEq KCI and restart at amphotericin B (0.7mg/kg/day) given over 4 hours and thereafter consider giving Amphotericin B on alternate days. Monitor renal function two to three times weekly.

If repeat creatinine remains elevated or continues to increase, discontinue amphotericin B and initiate high dose fluoonazole 1200mg orally once daily.
ART initiation
ART initiation or switching (in setting of treatment failure) should be done
4 weeks after amphotericin induction or 4-6 weeks after fluconazole induction. This is to minimise risk of cryptococcal IRIS syndrome which is associated with mortality.

Cryptococcal IRIS syndrome
Occurs after initiation of ART or switching ART and is associated with raised intracranial pressure and resultant symptoms. The patients will need admission, therapeutic LPs as above, an assessment for cryptococcal relapse with CSF being sent to lab for India ink exam, CSF biochemistry, CrAg titres and culture for Cryptococcus (up to 14 days). Relapse would indicate re-induction with amphotericin B. The CSF CrAg may remain positive for a long time after treatment.

Primary prevention of cryptococcal meningitis
Patients with CD4 count 100 or less are at higher risk of cryptococcal meningitis. Every newly diagnosed patient with a CD4 count less than 100 should have a serum CrAg screen done. If CrAg negative, they should be started on ART. If CrAg positive, they should be referred for LP to exclude cryptococcal meningitis. Patients with a CD4 of 101-200 also have a substantial incidence of cryptococcal meningitis and should receive CrAg screening when resources allow.
Secondary prevention of relapse of cryptococcal meningitis in AIDS patients after completion of primary management
Patients must be educated about adhering to the correct doses of fluconazole, not running out of treatment, completing the consolidation, continuation and maintenance phases at appropriate doses.


145

EDLIZ2020
Discontinuation of fluconazole can be considered with one of the following criteria is fulfilled:-
either
•   stable on ART and fluconazole for 1-year; CD4 >100 and viral load undetectable or
•   stable on ART and fluconazole for 1 year; CD4>200 where a viral load is not able to be obtained

AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX {HIV ENCEPHALOPATHY)
Characterized by progressive impairment in cognitive function that is accompanied by behavioural changes and motor abnormalities. Note: Other causes ofdementia must be excluded

Highly active antiretroviral therapy {HAART) is the best treatment to offer. Provide supportive care for the patient and their family. If psychotic or depressive features are prominent, refer for/add specific therapy to cover these conditions.

HIV RELATED SKIN CONDITIONS
Skin manifestations of HIV infection may be the result of opportunistic infections or HIV itself. Start ART as soon as possible as restoration of immunity tends to result in a resolution in most instances. Refer to a Skin Specialist if not getting better.
Persons with HIV/AIDS should be informed of the likelihood of increased photosensitivity as many develop hyperpigmentation of the face and the "v
of the neck. Excessive exposure to the sun should be avoided.
See a/so chapter on Skin Conditions for guidelines on common skin conditions and chapter on Sexually Transmitted Infections for guidelines on molluscum contagiosum and condyloma acuminata.
Herpes Zoster (Shingles)
Caused by a reactivation of Varicella Zoster virus infection.
Antiviral treatment should be started as soon as possible, ideally within 72 hours of onset of the shingles rash, for the treatment to be most effective. However, after this time, antiviral medications may still be helpful if new blisters are appearing. The three antiviral medicines used are acyclovir, Valaciclovir or Famciclovir. Acyclovir is the cheapest of them but has to be taken more frequently.
The pain of shingles can be very severe, and medications to reduce pain are frequently needed. The best options are the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medicines {e.g, ibuprofen). Topical lotions, such as calamine lotion are


146

EDLIZ2020
helpful in reducing the pain and itching of the lesions, thus avoiding traumatic sores and consequent keloid formation.
Following an attack of shingles, a person may experience continued pain for more than three months after the onset of the rash and this is referred to as post-herpetic  neuralgia.  In  addition  to  pain  medicines,  tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline, are effective in controlling the pain,


Medicine acyclovir po
or  valaciclovir po
Codes
C E
B E
Adult dose 800mg
1 gram
Frequency
5 times a day 3 times a day
Duration 7 days
7 days


•  Give analgesia: Medicine      Codes paracetamol po  C  N


Adult dose
500mg- 1gram


Frequency
3 t0 4 times a
day (max 4 grams a day)


Duration

Ibuprofen po    C  N  200-400mg  3 to 4 times a
day (max 1200 mg per day)










or
be aware of contraindicatio ns and cautions for anti- inflammatory medicines, in people with renal impairment or gastrointestinal ulcer

•  Add: Medicine amltrlptyllne po
•  and Skin care:


Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration B  E  25mg    once at night  review
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration calamine topical     C  N  topically    often     as required
and  povidone iodine     B  E  daily, for wound care, as required topical

Patients should be started on Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis
Refer immediately if there is ophthalmic or pulmonary involvement. Secondary infection (bacterial} may require treatment.
Post-Herpetic Neuralgia
This is pain that occurs after the rash is fully resolved:

147

EDLIZ2020

Medicine     Codes   Adult dose    Frequency   Duration



amitriptyline po  B   E  25-75mg  every night  as required
increased to 150mg if required.
carbamazepine po        B  V  100-200mg   every night
increased over 10 days to a max of 400mg (dose divided in 3.
Herpes Simplex Virus
In immunosuppressed persons, primary and recurrent herpes simplex lesions are usually more severe, more persistent, more symptomatic and more resistant to treatment. The early vesicular lesions (blisters) may be transient or never seen. In immunosuppressed patients, any erosive mucocutaneous lesion should be regarded as herpes simplex until proven otherwise.

Patients need to be counselled about the following:
• The recurrent nature of the lesions, as well as their likely persistence,
• The infectiousness of mucocutaneous or genital herpes.
• Care of local lesions: keep them clean with frequent (2 to 3 times a day) washing with soap and water and keeping them as dry as possible.
• In very severe cases or immunocompromised patients, acyclovir should be given.
• Bacterial superinfection may complicate lesions and will require antibiotics
• Suppressive therapy may be required for frequent (more than 4 to 6 episodes per year) recurrent HSV infections. After 1 year, the situation may be reviewed to either continue or change to episodic treatment or discontinue and assess the clinical situation.

Episodic and Suppressive treatment for herpes simplex
Medicine       Codes  Adult    Frequency   Duration dose
acyclovir po     C  E   400mg  3 times a day  5days
or   valaciclovir      B  E   500 mg   twice a day   5days
po
acyclovir po     C  E   400 mg   twice a day   daily for 12 months
then review
or   valaciclovir      B  E   500mg   twice a day   daily for 12 months
po                                then review
Seborrhoeic Dermatitis
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is a common, chronic, superficial inflammatory disease with a tendency to affect the scalp (dandruff), the eyebrows, eyelids,
148

EDLIZ2020
nasolabial folds and ears. Other areas affected are the lips, sternal area, axillae, submammary folds and groins. The condition is characterised by scales on an erythematous (reddened) base. Dandruff represents a mild form of seborrhoeic dermatitis.

People with HIV infection (even without immunosuppression) have an increased incidence of seborrhoeic dermatitis. This may be because one of the aetiological factors of seborrhoeic dermatitis is the presence of the yeast, Pityrosporum ovale which is found in higher density in such persons.


• Topical steroids, such as hydrocortisone 1% combined with a topical antifungal cream, such as miconazole cream 2%, are effective when applied twice daily.
• For the scalp, shampoos, such as 2% ketoconazole shampoo may be helpful, used 2 to 3 times a week. Subsequently, weekly use of such shampoos may reduce recurrence of the condition.
• Systemic treatment may be required in severe cases, using either itraconazole or terbinafine tablets.

Pruritic papular eruption
Pruritic papular eruption (PPE) of HIV is often reported as the most common skin rash seen in persons living with HIV infection. It is a form of prurigo. Between 20 and 46% of patients with HIV have this condition at some point in time. It can be the presenting symptom of HIV in 25-80% of cases, as well as be a dermatological sign of advanced HIV, being three times more common when the CD4 lymphocyte count is less than 200 ..
The rash can be very distressing for patients as it can be disfiguring and stigmatising, and treatment can be difficult and unsatisfactory.
PPE of HIV is nearly always a very itchy rash presenting as multiple, discrete scratched pimples or bumps, which are symmetrical and diffusely distributed. The extremities (arms and legs) and trunk are affected more than the face and usually the mucous membranes (mouth, nostrils, eyes, genitals), palms, and web spaces are spared.

Treatment is primarily to alleviate the itching, as PPE often proves very resistant to treatment. However, there are different treatment approaches that have been shown to be effective in some patients, which include the following.
■  Medium- to high-potency topical steroids, together with emollients (moisturisers),
•  Oral antihistamines e.g. chlorpheniramine or promethazine.


149

EDLIZ2020
•  Calamine lotion.

Medicine Reactions
These are frequently caused by cotrimoxazole, nevirapine, efavirenz, TB medicines. Stop the medicines and reassess.
HIV AND CANCER
HIV-infected  individuals  have  an  increased  incidence  of  several malignancies, including both AIDS-defining malignancies (Kaposi sarcoma [KS], cervical cancer, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma [NHL) including systemic NHL,  CNS  lymphoma,  primary effusion  lymphoma,  and  multicentric Castleman disease [MCD)), as well as a number of non-AIDS-defining cancers (NADCs) including lung, breast, prostate, colorectal.

Factors contributing to pathogenesis may include direct effects of HIV, immunosuppression, coinfection with other oncogenic viruses (eg. HPV, EBV, HBV or HCV) and other environmental oncogenic stimuli.

The  rollout  and  widespread  use  of  ART  has  prevented  severe immunosuppression for prolonged periods in many HIV-infected individuals which has been associated with a decrease in the incidence of KS.

Note that patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), cervix cancer, squamous cell conjunctival carcinoma are likely to be HIV positive and will need ART and treatment for the cancer (chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy).
HIV positive patients should continue their ART while they receive treatment for the cancer. Avoid zidovudine because of side effect of anaemia.
They should be managed by HIV specialists and oncologists.
KAPOSI'S SARCOMA (KS)
Patients with KS are in WHO clinical stage 4 and will require ART. Assess the KS stage (limited or mild, moderate or severe/extensive). Also assess for signs and symptoms of visceral involvement. Most patients present late with a high burden of tumour and hence chemotherapy is required. If possible, refer patients for specialist opinion prior to starting ART (this might avoid IRIS which may occur with extensive KS especially pulmonary KS) and should submit a biopsy for tissue diagnosis before referral. KS patients (in good general health, with limited early KS, <5 lesions) may respond to ART
alone but most patients will need chemotherapy; and the timing of chemotherapy is important.
Immune reconstitution with ART occurs and may worsen the KS dramatically.



150

EDLIZ2020
9. ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY


GENERAL NOTES GOALS FOR ART
CRITERIA FOR ART IN ADOLESCENCE AND ADULTS

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT REGIMENS FOR ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS
SUBSTITUTION IN THE EVENT OF MEDICINE TOXICITY/ ADVERSE EVENTS AND UNAVAILABILITY

USE OF ARVS IN PATIENTS WITH TB

PATIENTS WITH TB WHO ARE NOT YET ON ART PATIENTS WHO DEVELOP TB WHEN ALREADY ON ART
USE OF ARVS IN PATIENTS WITH CRYPTOCOCCAL MENINGITIS

PRE-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (PREP)









































151
152
152
152
154
158
161
161
162
162
171

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES
Appropriate and effective provision of ARVs needs to be provided by those who have received standardised training in the management of opportunistic infections as well as in the use of antiretroviral medicines. For more details on the use of ARVs refer to the current Guidelines for Antiretroviral Therapy for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV in Zimbabwe. Comprehensive  HIV/AIDS  care  requires  that  there  be  provision  of counselling;  HIV  testing  services,  laboratory  capacity  for  baseline assessment and monitoring as well as to diagnose commonly encountered opportunistic infections such as TB and cryptococcal meningitis. Pharmacy personnel should also be trained in 01/ART management as they will be required to ensure rational prescribing and proper dispensing of the antiretroviral medicines. In addition, they are required to ensure that their hospital/clinic has adequate ARV medicine supplies.
GOALS OF ART
The aims of antiretroviral therapy (ART) are:
•  Maximal and durable suppression of replication of HIV,
•  Restoration and/or preservation of immune function,
•  Reduction of HIV-related morbidity and mortality,
•  Improvement of quality of life,
•  Prevention of parent-to-child transmission of HIV (vertical transmission)
•  Reduction of transmission of HIV from infected to uninfected individuals through use of ARVs by the infected individual now commonly known as 'Treatment as prevention'
•  Reduction of transmission through provision of pre-exposure (PrEP) prophylaxis to high risk individuals.
CRITERIA FOR INITIATING ART IN ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS
Prior to starting ART, patients should be assessed for readiness to take ARVs; the ARV regimen; dosage and scheduling; the likely potential adverse effects; and the required monitoring. Both medical and psychosocial issues need to be addressed before initiating ART. Patients should be adequately counseled about adopting appropriate life style measures such as safer sexual practices (including appropriate use of condoms), and any other psychosocial problems that may interfere with adherence (e.g., alcohol, psychiatric disorders) should be addressed. Al each clinic visit always screen for tuberculosis using a TB symptom checklist, advise patients about adequate nutrition, the importance of medicine adherence and regular follow






152

EDLIZ2020
up care. People taking ARVs should also be regularly asked whether they are taking other medicines including herbal remedies as they may interfere with the efficacy of ARVs.

Early treatment is associated with clinical and HIV prevention benefits, improved survival and reduced incidence of HIV infection at the community level.  Increasing evidence also indicates that untreated HIV may be associated with the development of severe non-AIDS defining conditions including  cardiovascular disease,  kidney disease,  liver  disease  and neurocognitive disorders.

Medical Criteria for initiating ART in adolescents/ adults

All individuals with a confirmed HIV diagnosis are eligible for anti-retroviral therapy (ART) irrespective of WHO clinical stage and CD4 count level i.e. TREAT ALL. Health workers should retest all people newly and previously diagnosed with HIV before they initiate ART. As a priority, initiate ART in all individuals with severe or advanced HIV clinical disease (WHO clinical stage 3 or 4) or CD4 count less than or equal to 350 cells/ mm3. It is also recommended to initiate ART, as a priority, in the following categories of patients regardless of CD4 cell count:
1.  Active TB disease
2.  Pregnant and breast-feeding women with HIV
3.  Individuals with HIV in sero-discordant relationships
4.  HBV co-infection with severe chronic liver disease

Once an individual is confirmed to be HIV positive; health workers should provide adequate counselling and start ART within a week. However, for those patients who are not yet ready to start ART, they should receive on-going counselling and support.
Patients with CD4 <100
Patients with low CD4 below 100 should be fast-tracked for treatment initiation. They should be screened for symptomatic TB, cryptococcal disease (CrAg screening), visual changes and direct retina exam. They should receive Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis and TB Preventive Therapy (TPT) and should be closely monitored for 3 months as this is their highest risk period for bacterial infections and TB or crypto IRIS. Health workers should educate them and their families to report immediately to a health facility if they are unwell whilst their CD4 is < 100.
Psychosocial criteria for initiating ART
Consider the following psychosocial criteria when initiating ART:
•  Has the patient been adequately counselled and informed about ARVs?


153

EDLIZ2020
•  Is a treatment partner available and/or has disclosure been made to that treatment partner (strongly encouraged)?
•   Is there an easy method of following up on the patient?
•   Is the patient ready to take medication indefinitely?

Situations where it may be necessary to defer ART initiation
A patient may be deferred (delayed) from starting therapy if the patient
•  has cryptococcal meningitis,
•  needs further psychosocial support(e.g. for alcohol problems),
•   has TB (defer starting ART for at least 2 weeks),
•  needs further information on HIV and AIDS,
•   very ill patient and unable to swallow oral medication (palliative care is then offered to such a patient).
SUCH PATIENTS SHOULD BE OFFERED CONTINUED MONITORING
AND CLOSE FOLLOW-UP AS WELL AS COUNSELLING SO THAT ART CAN BE COMMENCED ATAN APPROPRIATE TIME.

ADHERENCE TO ART
WHO defines treatment adherence as 'the extent to which a person's behaviour- taking medications, following a diet and/or executes lifestyle changes' corresponds with agreed recommendations from a health care provider.
Efforts to support adherence should start before ART initiation and should include basic information about HIV, the ARV medicines, expected adverse events,  preparations  for  long-term  ART.  Effective  adherence  support interventions include client-centred behavioural counselling and support, support  from  peer  educators  trained  as  ·expert  patients,"  community treatment supporters and mobile text messaging. Other interventions involve encouraging people to disclose their HIV status and providing them with adherence tools such as pill boxes, diaries, and patient reminder aids. During follow-up, patients should be assessed for adherence to whatever treatment plan has been agreed upon (Integrated HIV training curriculum, MoHCC).

Recommended treatment regimens for adolescents and adults
The choice of medicine regimen is based on the essential medicine concept and the rational use of medicine. To maximise adherence, use of fixed-dose combinations (FDC) medicines is strongly encouraged.
The choice of ARVs has been based on evidence of efficacy and safety, on availability and cost of medications, as well as on the side effects profile and the potential for development of resistance. The national ART programme will use the following FDCs in the first line regimens:



154


1line ART

Adults  and adolescents including women   of child-bearing potential
EDLIZ2020
Preferred 1line
Regimens
Tenofovir (TDF) 300mg + Lamivudine (3TC) 300mg
+  Dolutegravir  (DTG) 50mg (once daily FDC)" (TLD1)

Alternative 1line Regimens

TDF (or TAF) + Emtricitabine (FTC) 200mg (or 3TC) +
AtazanavirRitonavir  (ATV/r) 300/100rng (once daily)

"Abacavir (ABC) 600mg + Lamivudine   (300mg)   + Dolutegravir  50mg"  (once daily)

TDF (or TAF) +3TC (or FTC) +
Efavirenz (EFV) 400mg (once daily)


First Line ART
A. Adults and adolescents including women of child-bearing potential

Medicine         Codes  Adult dose   Frequency    Duration
tenofovlr (TDF) +  C   V   300+300+50  once a day    life lamivudlne (3TC) +         mg
dolutegravir (DTG)
FDC) (TLD1) po
or   TDF (or TAF) +    C    V   300+200+300 once a day    life emtricltablne            /100mg
(FTC) (or 3TC) +
atazanavirlritonavi r (ATV/r) po
or   ..abacavir (ABC)+  C    V   600+300+50  once daily    life lamivudine    +         mg
dolutegravir po           (one tablet or each)
or   TDF (or TAF) +3TC  C   V   300+300+   once daily    life (or FTC) +              400mg
efavirenz (EFV) po

*TAF (tenofovir alafenamide) can be used as a substitute for TDF (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate)
·TB patients on Rifampicin to receive DTG 50mg twice a day ABC/3TC/DTG 50mg can be administered to patients weighing at least 2 kg
" TAF (tenofovir alafenamide) can be used as a substitute for TDF (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate)
AZT/3TC backbone may be used in special circumstances

• DTG is one of the preferred antretroviral medicines for first- and second- line regimens for everyone living with HIV including adults, pregnant
155

EDLIZ2020
women, women and adolescent girls of childbearing potential, children and people co-infected with TB.
• Dolutegravir (DTG) is a safe and efficacious medicine with a rapid viral suppression, low potential for drug-drug interactions and a high genetic barrier to developing ARV drug resistance. It should be included in the preferred  first  line  regimen  for  all  populations  unless  where contraindicated.
• Exposure to DTG at the time of conception may be associated with an increased risk of neural tube defects (NTDs) among infants although NTD risk has been further reduced compared to when first reported.
• DTG use has been associated with weight gain especially when co- administered with TAF/3TC. Prior to initiating DTG containing regimens; clinicians should advise patients on this potential side effect and advise on the importance of adopting healthy life-styles including exercising, taking healthy diets and avoidance of smoking.
• Effective contraception should be offered to adult women and adolescent girls of childbearing age or potential.
• DTG can be prescribed for adult women and adolescent girls of childbearing age or potential who wish to become pregnant or who are not otherwise using or accessing consistent and effective contraception if they have been fully informed of the potential increase in the risk of neural tube defects (at conception and until the end of the first trimester).
• Pregnancy test should be made available at health facilities to ascertain pregnancy status among women in order to support patient management. However, non-availability of pregnancy test kits should not be a barrier for administering DTG based regimens. If a woman's first realization of pregnancy is after the first trimester, DTG should be initiated or continued for the duration of the pregnancy.
• ART experienced patients should be transitioned to a DTG-containing regimen after confirming a suppressed HIV viral load of <1,000 copies/ml in the past twelve months:
o  If VL is suppressed, substitute the NNRTI with DTG
o   If VL is unsuppressed, manage as treatment failure. Provide 3 enhanced adherence counselling (EAC) sessions over 3 months to allow for good adherence followed by a repeat VL test. If the patient remains unsuppressed, switch patients to a DTG-based second line regimen.
• In PLHIV with TB using rifampicin, the dose of DTG should be increased to 50 mg twice daily.

• Tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) a derivative of TDF has less renal and bone toxicity compared to TDF. TAF may be used as a substitute for TDF for adults and adolescents. When available, TAF should be considered in


156

EDLIZ2020
elderly patients above 50 years, patients with Creatinine Clearance of 30
- 60(ml/min and HBV co-infected. However, TAF should NOT be used in: HIV/TB co-treatment or HIV infected pregnant women and patients with renal impairment with CrCI below 30.
• In order to facilitate effective management of patients on ART; ii is critical to make the distinction between patients on first line versus those taking second line ART. The program will use TLD1 to refer lo patients laking first line DTG-based regimens while TLD2 will refer lo those on second line DTG-based regimens.
• Use of Nevirapine (NVP) and Efavirenz (EFV) 600mg (NNRTI) in adults and adolescents is being phased out and health providers are advised to limit its use. Due to high levels of pretreatment HIV drug resistance in Zimbabwe (>10%), NNRTls are less preferred.

•   Efavirenz  400mg  is  safe  for  use  among  pregnant  women. Pharmacokinetic and pharrnacodynamics studies suggest that the drug concentrations decline  slightly during  pregnancy;  however,  remain within therapeutic range and unlikely to reduce the drug efficacy.
•   Efavirenz 400 mg can be co-administered with rifampicin containing anti-TB treatment; is well tolerated and plasma concentrations were maintained above the levels considered to be effective.
•  When available, tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) may be considered for elderly patients above 50 years; patients with impaired kidney function, established osteoporosis and among HBV co-infected patients.

Caution: Tenofovir (TDF)
TDF may be associated with acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease as well as reduced bone mineral density in pregnant women.
Clinical considerations when using TDF
•  Patients should be initiated on TDF even in the absence of laboratory monitoring capacity for U &Es. However, efforts should be made to strengthen laboratory monitoring of patients,
•  Routine blood pressure monitoring,
•  Urine dipsticks may be used to detect glycosuria or severe TDF nephrotoxicity in individuals without diabetes using TDF-containing regimens.
•  If the creatinine test is routinely available, use the estimated glomerular filtration rate at baseline before initiating TDF regimens.
Do not initiate TDF when the estimated glomerular filtration rate is <50 ml/min, or in long term diabetes, uncontrolled hypertension and renal failure.

157

EDLIZ2020

Calculation of GFR or Creatinine clearance in ml/min using Cockcroft Gault
Equation


Male:

Female:
123 X(140-age)x tin Ka/ Creatinine (in micromolsL)

1.04 X 1140-aqe\ x wt in kg/ Creatinine (in micromols/L


Substitution in the event of medicine toxicity / adverse events and unavailability
If the patient has suspected adverse medicine events, therapy should be altered as follows (change of a single medicine in a multi-medicine regimen is permitted-that is, the offending medicine may be replaced, preferably with an alternative medicine of the same class):

•  Given Zidovudine toxicity such as anaemia or neutropenia, Zidovudine will be replaced by Tenofovir.
•   In the event of lactic acidosis, the current ARVs should be discontinued and ART restarted after checking for normalization of the lactate levels.
•  In case of severe psychiatric reaction on EFV give NVP
•  In case creatinine clearance is known and < 50ml/min give AZT.
An alternative to lamivudine (3TC) is emtricitabine (FTC); these medicines are considered pharmacologically equivalent. In the event that you come across a patient on Tenofovir/Emtricitabine /Efavirenz, you may substitute Emtricitabine with lamivudine.

For patients presenting with renal impairment, consult/ refer for specialist opinion.

SECOND-LINE TREATMENT RECOMMENDATION FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS
Ideally, patients who fail to respond to first-line treatment should be treated with a different regimen containing medicines that were not included in the first regimen. The second-line regimen will consist of two NRTls but with a Pl
if the initial regimen contained DTG. The second-line regimen should be initiated only after assessing treatment adherence and failure and in consultation with a specialist in HIV and AIDS treatment or the clinical mentorship team at the 01/ART clinic, as the recommendation will be based




158

EDLIZ2020
on what the patient is already taking or has taken in the past. Clinical mentors should be consulted where there is doubt about what to do. More adherence counselling will be required in preparation for the planned new therapy.

Table 9.1: Preferred second line regimens for adults and adolescents including pregnant and breastfeeding women
Failing first line   Preferred second  Alternate  second-
Regimens      line         line Regimens
Regimens
Tenofovir 300mg   Zidovudine 300mg  Zidovudine 300mg
{TDF (or TAF)} +   (AZT) + Lamivudine  (AZT) + Lamivudine
Lamivudine 300mg  300mg (3TC)+    300mg (3TC) (3TC) +      Atazanavir/Ritonavir  +Lopinavir/ritonavir Dolutegravir 50mg  3001100mg (ATV/r)  LPV/r
(DTG)
or
ABC + 3TC + DTG
TDF (or TAF) + 3TC  AZT + 3TC + DTG    AZT+ 3TC +
(or FTC)+ ATV/r                 LPV/r
TDF (or TAF) + 3TC
+ EFV
AZT + 3TC + EFV   TDF (or TAF) + 3TC
+DTG

Failing first line Regimens

A.  Tenofovlr 300mg {TDF (or TAF)} + Lamivudine 300mg (31C) +
Dolutegravlr 50mg (DTG) or ABC + 3TC + DTG

Preferred second line Regimen

Medicine
zidovudine 300mg (AZT) + lamivudine 300mg (3TC) +
atazanavir/ritonavir 300/100mg (ATV/r) (PO)
Codes  Adult dose    Frequency  Duration C V   1 tablet of AZT/3TC in the    life
morning and 1 tablet each of
AZT/3TC and ATV/r in the evening








159



or zidovudine 300mg (AZT)+ lamivudine 300mg (3TC) +
lopinavir/ritonavir LPV/r
EDLIZ2020
C V 1tablet of AZT/3TC and 2 tablets life of LPV/r in the morning and evening


8.  TDF (or TAF) + 3TC (or FTC)+ ATV/r or TDF (or TAF) + 3TC + EFV
Preferred Second line Regimen


Medicine
AZT +3TC+DIG  C



or AZ.T + 3TC + LPV/r  C
Codes
V



V
Adult dose   Frequency Duration
1 tablet of AZT/3TC and DTG in life the morning and 1 tablet each of AZT/3TC in the evening

1 tablet of AZT/3TC and 2 tablets life of LPV/r in the morning and evening



C.  AZT + 3TC + EFV
Preferred Second line Regimen


Medicine
TDF (or TAF) + 3TC
+pG
Codes
C V
Adut dose
1 tablet
Frequency  Duration
once a day  life


If TDF + 3TC or ABC + 3TC (or FTC) was used in the failing first-line regimen, AZT + 3TC should be used in second-fine ART and vice versa

For HIV/TB coinfection on rifampicin-based regimen, use LPV/R (super booster) instead of ATV/rand DTG twice daily instead of DTG once daily Maintain TDF in the second line for patients with chronic HBV coinfeclion
Main Considerations:
•  Patients failing first line (ref to ART Guidelines) should be switched to an effective second line regimen.
•  Precautions in the use of DTG also apply for second- and third-line ARV regimens






160

EDLIZ2020
THIRD-LINE TREATMENT RECOMMENDATION FOR ADULTS AND ADOLESCENTS

In adolescents older than 12 years and adults; the preferred 3"' line ART can include Dolutegravir (50mg), Darunavir (600mg)/Ritonavir (100mg) and 2NRTls.

Main Considerations:
•   GENOTYPING  TESTING  IS  RECOMMENDED  PRIOR  TO SWITCHING PATIENTS FAILING SECOND LINE ART with clinicians
required to actively rule out poor adherence before genotypic testing.
•   In  Pl experienced patients; Darunavir (600mg)/Ritonavir (100mg) should be given twice daily
3rd line patients with a history of integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI) use e.g. DTG or Raltegravir, DTG should be given twice daily.

USE OF ARVS IN PATIENTS WITH TB
(Refer to the latest national TB guidelines or TB/HIV guidelines)
TB is the most common Ol encountered among people with HIV infection in Zimbabwe. Since the advent of the pandemic of HIV infection, TB has remained a serious public-health problem. Studies have shown that up to 50% of people with HIV infection develop TB and that up to 85% of patients with TB have HIV infection. In addition, TB accounts for a third of HIV-related deaths. There is a need to integrate the HIV and TB services, as TB and HIV coinfection is common. All patients living with HIV should be screened for TB at every visit using the standard TB screening tools. Rifampicin interacts adversely with some antiretroviral agents such as Pis therefore,
• TB patients on Rifampicin should receive DTG 50mg twice a day
• Efavirenz 400mg can be co-administered with rifampicin containing anti- TB treatment; is well tolerated and plasma concentrations were maintained above the levels considered to be effective.
• For HIV/TB coinfection on rifampicin-based regimen, use LPV/R (super booster) instead of ATV/r
PATIENTS WITH TB WHO ARE NOT YET ON ART
In patients who have HIV-related TB but are not yet on ART, treatment of TB takes priority. ART should be started at least two weeks after the start of TB therapy i.e. during the intensive phase when the patient has stabilised on TB treatment regardless of their CD4 count status. Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis



161

EDLIZ2020
should be provided with the commencement of the TB therapy if the patient is not on it already.

Patients who develop TB when already on ART
Treat TB as per national TB guidelines.

USE OF ARVS IN PATIENTS WITH CRYPTOCOCCAL MENINGITIS
Prevention of Cryptococcal Disease
Patients initiating ART with undiagnosed cryptococcal disease are at higher risk of early mortality than patients who are pre-emptively diagnosed and treated for cryptococcal disease. All patients initiating ART should be clinically screened for evidence of symptomatic cryptococcal disease -- headache, neck stiffness, fever, focal neurologic signs, confusion, and altered mental status. All those who screen positive should be referred for further diagnostic work up for meningitis. Screening of asymptomatic ART naive individuals with CD4 count <100cells/mm3 is recommended and should be done with a Cryptococcal neoformans antigen test (CrAg) using latex agglutination tests (LA) or lateral flow assays (LFA) on serum, plasma or CSF. A lumbar puncture should be offered to individuals who screen positive for cryptococcal antigen, as a positive cryptococcal antigen may precede the onset of clinical cryptococcal meningitis by many weeks.
Individuals who are screened for cryptococcal disease should be managed as indicated in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2: Treatment decisions for asymptomatic cryptococcal disease
Serum   No LP necessary. No fluconazole required. Initiate ART.
CrAg negative
Serum   If available recommend LP:
CrAg positive
If CSF CrAg positive, manage for cryptococcal meningitis If CSF CrAg negative treat with Fluconazole 800mg orally once daily for 2 weeks, then Fluconazole 400mg orally
daily for 8 weeks, followed by maintenance therapy with Fluconazole 200mg orally daily until CD4>200 cells/mm³ for 6 months

Timing of ART for individuals with asymptomatic cryptococcal antigenemia is unknown. We recommend initiation of ART 2-4 weeks after initiation of



162

EDLIZ2020
antifungal therapy in individuals who screen positive for serum CrAg without any evidence of disseminated cryptococcal meningitis.
Timing of ART in cryptococcal meningitis
The timing of the initiation of ART in patients with cryptococcal meningitis is still uncertain. Early initiation of ART is recommended for all Ols except for intracranial Ols such as TB meningitis and cryptococcal meningitis.  In cryptococcal meningitis ART can be initiated 4- 6 weeks after initiation of anlifungal therapy with amphotericin B based regimens. In patients who are predominately treated with fluconazole monotherapy ART should be initiated at least 4 weeks after initiation of antifungal therapy.
ART should not be commenced at the same time that amphotericin B and/or fluconazole therapy is commenced for cryptococcal meningitis.


USE OF ARVS IN CHILDREN

More than 90% of HIV-infected children acquire their infection through mother to child transmission of HIV (vertical transmission). Thus, elimination of new HIV infections among children through effective PMTCT interventions should be prioritized. HIV disease progression occurs very rapidly in the first few months of life in infants acquiring HIV in utero, often leading to death. The importance of early infant diagnosis (EID) of HIV infection and early initiation of ART can therefore not be overemphasised.

EARLY INFANT DIAGNOSIS
Birth PCR where available will be done within 48hrs of birth ONLY for high MTCT risk infants. ART initiation is recommended as soon as birth PCR results are available. For babies who test HIV positive at birth ALWAYS retest and confirm results with repeat PCR but retesting should not delay ART initiation. Babies who test negative at birth (birth PCR) or not tested MUST be tested at 6 weeks. Infants at high risk of transmission will receive dual ARVs (AZT and NVP) for 12 weeks as prophylaxis if breastfeeding and 6 weeks if not breastfeeding. Cotrimoxazole must be started from 6 weeks of age even in babies on longer duration of prophylaxis and continued through adolescence.

All infants with unknown or uncertain HIV exposure being attended to at health-care facilities at or around birth or at the first postnatal visit (usually 4--6 weeks) or other child health visit should have their HIV exposure status ascertained. This can be done in by: • Asking if the mother knows her HIV status or is on ART • Checking the hand held child health card for information on maternal HIV status• Performing a rapid HIV test on the mother • Performing a rapid HIV test on the baby- N.B. this can be used to


163

EDLIZ2020


assess HIV exposure only in infants less than 4 months of age. HIV- exposure status in infants and children 4--18 months of age should be ascertained by undertaking HIV serological testing in the mother

Where virological testing is not available for children under 18 months of age, a presumptive diagnosis of severe HIV disease should be made if the infant is confirmed HIV antibody positive and:
1. Diagnosis of any AIDS-defining condition(s) can be made, or
2. The infant is symptomatic with two or more of the following:
1. Oral thrush
2. Severe pneumonia
3. Severe sepsis

Infants under 18 months of age with clinically diagnosed presumptive severe HIV should be started on ART. Confirmation of HIV diagnosis should be obtained as soon as possible.


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ANTIBODY TESTING IN INFANTS
Antibody tests (rapid and laboratory-based ELISA) are the preferred method of diagnosis for HIV infection for children over 18 months of age.

In a child under 18 months who has never been breastfed and HIV antibody tests are negative, this child is uninfected and virological testing is indicated only if clinical signs or subsequent events suggest HIV infection.

In a child under 18 months who has not breastfed for more than six weeks, HIV antibody tests that are negative mean the child is uninfected.
HIV antibody tests that are positive at any age under 18 months identify those infants who need virological tests (i.e., the child is HIV exposed but needs definitive test with HIV DNA PCR to confirm HIV infection).


CARE OF AN HIV-EXPOSED INFANT

Initial care
Care for HIV-exposed infants should include the following:
• Make sure HIV-exposed infants are entered into the "HIV exposed follow-up register".

• All HIV-exposed infants should have a HIV DNA PCR testing performed from six weeks of age or at the earliest possible time thereafter if 6 weeks testing is missed.

164

EDLIZ2020
•  Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis should be given from six weeks of age until the HIV status of the infant is known. If HIV infection is confirmed, continue cotrimoxazole and commence on ART.

•  Monthly follow up visits are recommended, but more frequent visits may be needed if problems are detected.


During these visits the following services should be provided:

• Growth monitoring and promotion
• Developmental assessment

Counselling on infant and young child feeding:
• Counselling and support for the HIV infected mother to adhere to ART is crucial.
• Weaning should not be abrupt, but rather should be gradual over a one month period.
• HIV-infected infants diagnosed by virological testing or infants with symptoms suggestive of HIV should continue breastfeeding for as long as possible.
• Immunisations should be given according to the national guidelines. The BCG vaccination should still be given at birth, but BCG should not be given to children with symptomatic HIV infection.
• Always look for and treat opportunistic infections.

MANAGEMENT OF AN HIVINFECTED CHILD USING ARVS

Infants and young children have an exceptionally high risk of poor outcomes from HIV infection.
The goal of ART for children is to increase survival and decrease HIV- related morbidity and mortality.
Criteria to initiate ART in children
Test earlier, test closer (using early infant diagnosis POC where available) and treat earlier. ART should be initiated in ALL children living with HIV, regardless of WHO clinical stage and CD4 count. Children under 5 years or with WHO clinical stage Ill/IV or CD4 < 25% (< 5 years) or < 350 (>5 years)
should be a priority.






165

EDLIZ2020
Issues to consider in initiating ART in children
Psychosocial factors: It is important to identify and counsel at least one dedicated caregiver who can supervise and/or give medicines. Disclosure: The process of disclosure to the child should be initiated as early as possible, usually from as early as 5-7 years of age. Adherence is good in children who know their status and are supported lo adhere lo medicines.


Table 9.3: Recommended first-line treatment for children

Preferred First line   Alternative first line  Special treatment        treatment       circumstances
Neonates (up   Zidovudine (AZT) +   AZT +3TC +NVP   AZT +3TC +
to 6 weeks)    Lamivudine (3TC) +               Lopinavir/ritonavir Raltearavir (Ral)'                 (LPVir
Children> 6   AZT + 3TC +       AZT +3TC+NVP
weeks      Lopinavir/ritonavir     ABC + 3TC + LPVr (LPVIr)         ABC +3TC + NVP
Children and   ABC + 3TC +      ABC + JTC + LPV/r   ABC + 3TC+ adolescents    Dolutegravir (DTG)"              Efavirenz (EFV)"
>25kg                                AZT + 3TC +
Lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r)

For the shortest time possible (ideally for 2 weeks with transition to LPV/r syrup or granules). To allow for convenience and to align with the EPI schedule, RAL in neonates can be given for the first 6 weeks of life with substitution to LPV/r at 6 weeks of age until dosage formulations of DTG become available.
"For age and weight groups with DTG approved dosing and where LPV/r is not available
From 3 years of age
·ln cases where no other alternatives are available

Monitoring children on ART
•  Check haemoglobin after at least 6-8 weeks if on Zidovudine
•  Use urine dipsticks to check for glycosuria and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and/or serum creatinine when on Tenofovir
•  Check for alanine aminotransferase (ALT) when on Nevirapine
•  Check CD4 count every 6 months
•  Conduct viral load testing once every year or when clinical signs are suggestive of treatment failure





166

EDLIZ2020
RECOMMENDED SECOND-LINE TREATMENT FOR CHILDREN
Definition of treatment failure in children

Clinical Failure:
New  or  recurrent  clinical  event  indicating  advanced  or  severe immunodeficiency (WHO clinical stage 3 and 4, clinical condition with exception of TB) after 6 months of effective treatment

Immunological failure:
In children younger than 5years: - CD4 levels persistently below 200 cells/mm³ or CD4 percentage <10%
Children older than 5 years - CD4 levels persistently below 100cells/mm3

Virological failure:
Plasma viral load above 1000 copies/ ml based on two consecutive viral load measurements after 3-months, with adherence support.

OR If using dry blood spot technology, a viral load above 3000 copies/ml based on two consecutive viral load measurements after 3 months, with adherence support.
Table 9.4: Recommended 2" and 3" Line ART r regimens

Failing first line     Second line        Third line
ABC +3TC + LPV/r      AZT +3TC +OTG        ORV/r + 2NRT1s
ABC + 3TC +DTG       TDF +3TC +LPv        OTG+DR
ABC + 3TC + EFV       TOF + 3TC +DTG       Vhr + 2NRT%
TDF + 3TC + DTG       AZT + 3TC + ATVr or
LPV/r

Where dosage guidelines and appropriate formulations are available, DTG is preferred as first line in children
DTG can also be used in 1st, 2nd and 3rd line
EFV should not be used in children less than 3 years of age ORV should not be used for children younger than 3 years of age. ORV should be used with ritonavir boosting in those above 3 years of age
Discuss the child with your mentor IF NOT SURE OF SECOND LINE TREATMENT






167

EDLIZ2020
Starting ART in children using FDCs

Refer to dosing table. Keep the following factors in mind regarding dosing:
•   Medicine doses must be adjusted as the child grows.
•  Dosing is by weight.
•  Overdosing up to 10% is acceptable.
•   Scored tablets may be divided into two equal halves
•   Tablets may be crushed and mixed with a small amount food or water and administered immediately.










































168

EDLIZ2020









«t


0
.t
0

c                                o u0
eu                             cvIcv [co(cu [u
U
C:
t
.r:,
•      uo
p  0     ci
6
3 o




cu       t  «t  t



..
2
0
5
.l!l
l
zc
u




o


0
.at
0
'9
toy
t






cy



cu  cu  cu

u  cu  u


0
E
3
oE
( .+
2'E
oo cuu




0
E
�o
oE
st


z%
.l!l

EDLIZ2020







�  �


0U  U"�'
z  E
0  0
2  2

-c  -a

£  £
Q)   0
0  0


P  P
E  5
Q)   Q)
0  0
.-e...
v
0r
3
E
£
o
Q)
0
0
o
c









0  -0
oE  oE
o  cooy
0  o
oE  o~oE
o  oo
coy  co



±_ ad u>
o : L.I0--
O  O2
( -o £8%
LJ.. ::, LL --
0 6
U I- "' "'

EDLIZ2020


PRE-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (PREP)
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is the use of ARVs by people who are not infected with HIV before HIV exposure in order to prevent the acquisition of HIV. With optimum adherence, oral PrEP is more than 90% effective in reducing the risk of HIV infection.

Eligibility criteria for oral PrEP
Oral PrEP should be offered to individuals who are HIV negative and are at substantial risk of HIV infection. Individuals at high risk have:
•  Multiple sexual partners
•  Inconsistent and incorrect use of condoms
•  Engage in transactional sex
•  Use or abuse of injectable drugs and alcohol
•  Episode(s) of STI within the last six months
•   Discordant couples, especially if the HIV positive partner is not on ART or has been on ART for less than six months or those with high viral load
•  Recurrent users of PEP
In addition, individuals should commit and be supported to adhere to PrEP. Sub-populations considered to be at high risk for HIV infection include: people in sero-discordant relationships, sex workers, and long distance truck drivers, men who have sex with other men (MSM), adolescent girls and young women and pregnant and breastfeeding women.


Recommended regimens for oral PrEP
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency
tenofovir (TOF) 300mg  C  v  1tablet FDC once only
+ emtricitabine (FTC) 200mg
or  tenofovir (TOF) 300mg  C  v  1tablet FDC once only
+ lamivudine {3TC) 300mg

Duration
period of substantial risk
period of substantial risk

NB: In cases where TDF/FTC or TDF/3TC are both not available, TDF single formulation can be used
NB It takes about 7 days of daily dosing PrEP to be effective. During this period, other HIV preventive options such as abstinence and condoms must be used.
•   PrEP medications should be continued for 28 days after the last potential HIV exposure in those wanting to stop taking PrEP.
•   PrEP may be used intermittently during periods of perceived HIV acquisition risk, rather than continually and lifelong, as is the case with antiretroviral treatment.
171

EDLIZ2020
•   Other regimens and formulations for PrEP will be introduced in the future

Contraindications for PrEP
•  HIV positive status
•  Unknown HIV status
•  Recent exposure (in the past 72 hours)
•   Evidence or suspicion of HIV primary infection (characterised by a flu-like illness)
•  Allergy to any of the PrEP medicines
•  Unwilling/unable to adhere to PrEP
•  Known renal impairment
•  Estimated creatinine clearance of <60 cc/min

Follow up and Monitoring of PrEP clients
•   After initiating PrEP, the client should be reviewed after one month to monitor adherence and side effects as well as resupply of medicines, subsequent clinic visits should be every three months
•  Perform an HIV antibody test every three months and document negative HIV status
•   For women, perform a pregnancy test based on clinical history. Pregnancy is not a contraindication for PrEP use
•   Review the  client's  understanding  of PEP,  any  barriers  to adherence, tolerance to the medication as well as any side effects
•   Review the client's risk exposure profile and perform risk reduction counselling
•   Evaluate and support PrEP adherence at each clinic visit
•   Evaluate the client for any symptoms of STls at every visit and treat as needed
•  Provide risk assessment and risk reduction counselling at every visit
Discontinuing PrEP
PrEP can be discontinued in the following circumstances:
• On seroconversion (HIV positive)
• Intolerable toxicities and side effects associated with PrEP use
• Changed life situations resulting in lowered risk of HIV acquisition
• Social adverse events associated with PrEP
• Poor adherence despite efforts to improve daily pill taking
• When a personal choice is made to stop PrEP. Such individuals should be linked to other preferred HIV prevention options



172

EDLIZ2020
• In sere-discordant couples when HIV infected partner on ART has achieved viral suppression (VL<1,000 copies/ml) with at least 6 months of ART
NB It is important to ensure that the client continues to take the medicines for at least 28 days after the last exposure.

POST-EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (PEP)
In people who have been exposed to HIV through needle-stick inoculation or through contamination of mucous membranes by secretions, it has been shown that administration of ARVs within 72 hours of exposure reduces the likelihood of HIV infection being transmitted. There are also similar benefits of reduction of HIV transmission following use of PEP within 72 hours for those who have been sexually assaulted (rape, intimate partner violence or sexual abuse) or had a high risk unprotected sexual encounter. In these situations, ART needs to be continued for one month. The following guidelines should be followed in the event of accidental occupational exposure to material (i.e., blood, secretions, and excretions) that may contain HIV, and also after sexual assault or high risk sexual encounter. Occupational exposure to potentially infectious material may occur through an injury with a sharp object that has been used on a patient or through the contamination of mucous surfaces with patients' blood or secretions.


The following types of exposures should be considered for post-exposure prophylaxis:
• Needle-stick injury or injury with a sharp object used on a patient
• Mucosa! exposure of the mouth or eyes by splashing fluids
• Broken skin exposed to a small volume of blood or secretions such as may occur with sexual assault (rape, intimate partner violence or sexual abuse)
Occupational exposure can be classified as high risk or low risk for HIV infection, as follows:
Low risk:
• Small volume (e.g., drops of blood) on mucous membranes or non-intact skin
• Source patient asymptomatic or with VL less than 1,500 copies/ml

High risk:
• Large-bore needle, deep injury
• Large-volume splash on mucous membranes or non-intact skin
• Source patient symptomatic or with high VL levels

173

EDLIZ2020
Adu Its/Adolescents:
Preferred Regimen    TDF /3TC/ DTG  OD

Alternative Regimen   TDF I3TC/ ATVIr OD

a.b Available at all health facilities from clinic upwards as starter pack and one-month course.

Main Considerations:
There should be no delay in starting the best available starter pack in situations where resistance is suspected. Start the best available starter pack and then get expert advice on way forward.






































174

EDLIZ2020
10. USE OF ARVS FOR PREVENTION OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION OF
HIV (PMTCT)
GENERAL NOTES

INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING RECOMMENDATIONS ARV PROPHYLAXIS IN AN HIV-EXPOSED INFANT





















































175







176
177
178

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES
Mother-to-child transmission is responsible for more than 90% of HIV infection in children and at least two thirds of such infections occur during pregnancy and delivery whilst the remainder occur during breastfeeding. It is therefore critical to identify HIV-positive pregnant and lactating women and  manage them appropriately.
When to start ART in HIV positive pregnant and breastfeeding women

•   All HIV infected pregnant and breastfeeding women should be initiated on lifelong antiretroviral treatment (ART) irrespective of their CD4 count or WHO clinical stage (Option B+).
•  Women who are not yet ready for lifelong ART should be initiated on triple ARVs (ART), which should be continued at least for the duration of breastfeeding to prevent further risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV through breast milk.


Being on lifelong ART will necessitate ongoing counselling of HIV positive pregnant and breastfeeding women to support retention and adherence and to minimize loss to follow-up.

•  Emphasise modes of HIV transmission and prevention, PMTCT, and access to care and treatment.
•  Encourage partner HIV testing and counselling
•  Encourage the importance of skilled birth attendance, clean and safe delivery, and newborn care.
•  Counsel on infant and young child feeding and maternal nutrition.
•  Counsel on sexual and reproductive health including family planning and the need for dual contraception (reliable hormonal contraceptive plus barrier method like male or female condoms)
•  Make an appointment for family planning at six weeks postpartum.
•  Stress the need for condom use for prevention of STls and HIV during pregnancy and in the postpartum period.
•   Retest previously negative women: during 3" trimester of pregnancy and/ or at delivery, 6 weeks post natally and 6monthly thereafter.
•  Stress the importanoe of follow-up for the HIV exposed infant
o Commence cotrimoxazole prophylaxis from 6 weeks of age
o Collect Dried Blood Spot (DBS) for HIV DNA PCR test at 6 weeks of age i.e.Early Infant Diagnosis (EID).
o Infants should be re-tested at the end of the breast-feeding period







176

EDLIZ2020
When using ARVs in pregnant women, certain precautions should be kept in mind:
Dolutegravir (DTG)
Exposure to DTG at the time of conception may be associated with an increased risk of neural tube defects (NTDs) among infants although NTD risk has been further reduced compared to when first reported.


Efavirenz (EFV)
Previously there was a recommendation not to use Efavirenz during the first trimester and in women at risk of becoming pregnant. However, WHO issued evidence-based update on Efavirenz safety in pregnancy in 2011 which recommends it to be safe for use even in the first trimester.
Efavirenz 400mg is safe for use among pregnant women. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics studies suggest that the drug concentrations decline slightly during pregnancy; however, remain within therapeutic range and unlikely to reduce the drug efficacy.


INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING RECOMMENDATIONS

All mothers whether known to be infected with HIV or not should exclusively breastfeed their infants (no mixed feeding) for the first 6 months of life, introducing safe, adequate and nutritious complementary foods thereafter, with continued breastfeeding up to 24 months and beyond.
























177

EDLIZ2020
ARV PROPHYLAXIS IN AN HIV-EXPOSED INFANT



HIV erpoed infant


■  •   
High MTCTrbk

(Maternal ViLOO0copies per mlat
Low MTCTrisk (Maternal VI
3 weeks gestation, MonernalARTfor  <1.000copies ml oat 32 wels  

less than 8 weels, serocorverion
during MICTrikperiod)
gestation)

'





Breastfeeding HIVexpoed infant
..E.          h

- tNVPprophyMauhfor t

font AZT+NPprophyMaisfor 12      .
weeks;
NATat birth; /fnegotive repeat
NATot 6 week
weeks,
NATat 6 weels










Non breastfeeding HV exposedinfant

InfantAT+NVPprophyahsfor 6weeks;
NATat birth;ifnegative repeat NATat 6 week





178

EDLIZ2020
11. TUBERCULOSIS


PREVENTION PRIMARY PREVENTION
SECONDARY PREVENTION
CASE MANAGEMENT
MEDICINE REGIMENS FOR TUBERCULOSIS CATEGORY I
CATEGORY II
DAILY DOSES BY WEIGHT --CATEGORY I DAILY DOSES BY WEIGHT -- CATEGORY II






































179
180
180
181
184
186
186
186
188
188

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES
Tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic, infectious, debilitating disease, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium. It is a public health problem and all cases must be notified to the Provincial/City Medical Director in terms of the Public Health Act.

CONTROL OF TUBERCULOSIS - TB POLICY
More information on National Policy and the organisation of TB services is available in various TB resource documents, including but not limited to: Tuberculosis and Leprosy Management Guidelines, Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Drug Resistant Tuberculosis (DR-TB) and the Zimbabwe National TB Strategic Plan.
The essential points of the TB policy are:
•  Rapid molecular diagnostics (Xpert MTB/Rif / Xpert MTB/Rif Ultra) are the preferred diagnostic test for all patients undergoing TB investigation.
•  TB medicines are provided free of charge in the public health sector.
•  TB services are available and integrated at all levels of the health delivery system.
•  Collaborative TB/HIV activities are to be ensured at all levels.
An important emphasis of the TB programme is the direct observation of treatment (DOT), which is the practice of a treatment supervisor watching the patient taking their daily doses. A supervisor can either be a Health Care Worker or a trained member of the community. Notification, registration, record keeping and contact tracing activities - in addition to treatment - are key to the success of the programme.

TB first line fixed dose combinations (FL FDCs) are to be available at all levels from C through to A. Single formulations are B level medicines. TB medicines are accorded V level of priority.

TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION

Primary prevention
BCG vaccination should be given to all babies at birth - or at first contact with the child after birth -- according to national guidelines. While BCG does not offer complete immunity to tuberculosis, it offers protection from the severe forms of tuberculosis such as miliary TB and TB meningitis.


180

EDLIZ2020
•  BCG vaccine should be given to all babies at birth or at first contact with the child after birth, except babies with clinical signs of HIV infection and/or in infants born to a mother with sputum positive TB.
•  BCG is given intradermally on the right upper arm, above the insertion of the deltoid muscle.
•  The batch number of the vaccine and the date must be recorded on the child's health card.
•  No booster dose should be given.
Dosage is as recommended by the EPI (see the chapter on Immunisation).
Problems associated with BCG vaccination remain uncommon and are mainly due to faulty technique.
Abscesses or ulcers should be treated with local hygienic care. Abscesses should be aspirated not incised. Secondary infections can be treated with antibiotics. Non-healing ulcers, (ulcers of duration > 8 weeks) or regional lymphadenopathy can be treated as follows, (see table10.1).


BCG related regional lymphadenopathy treatment

Medicine
isoniazid po
Codes B  V
Dose
10mg/kg
Frequency
once a day
Duration
2 months

SECONDARY PREVENTION

TB PREVENTIVE THERAPY (TPT)
TPT priority target groups are PLH IV and  household  contacts of bacteriologically confirmed TB index cases including child (<15 years) and adult (>15 years) contacts. See table 10.2 for the current TPT options.
Table 10.1: Preferred LTBI Treatment Options
Population Group       Preferred Treatment   Alternative


Adults
PLHIV on EFV and DTG based   Rifapentine plus      Isoniazid alone regimen             isoniazid
[6H]
[3HP)
PLHIV on TAF-based regimen,   lsoniazid alone      .
or Pis

181

EDLIZ2020
[6H}

HIV negative contacts (adults   Rifapentine plus isoniazid  lsoniazid alone and adolescents >15 years)
[3HP}           [6H)
Children
CLHIV on EFV-based regimen   Rifapentine plus isoniazid  Isoniazid alone (Adolescents, children >2yrs)
(3HP)           (6H)
CLHIVon DTG -based regimen,  Isoniazid alone PIs and NNRTIS
(6H}
HIV negative contacts (children   lsoniazid plus rifampicin   lsoniazid alone under 15s)           (RH)



Special Groups
[3RH]
[6H)
'MDR-TB Contacts        Levofloxacin        -
[6LFX)
Pregnant women        lsoniazid alone [6H]

• The preventive treatment for MOR contacts should be individualized after a careful assessment of the intensity of exposure, the certainty of the source case, reliable information on the drug resistance pattern of the source case and potential adverse events. The preventive treatment should be given only to household contacts at high risk in whom active disease has been ruled out (e.g. children 5 years and below, people receiving immunosuppressive therapy and people living with HIV). levofloxacin should be selected according to the drug susceptibility profile of the index case. Confirmation of infection with LTBI tests is required.













182

EDLIZ2020

Table 10.2: Recommended TPT doses by Regimen

Regimen      Dose                Maximum Dose

Weekly for 3 months (12 doses) lsoniazid
Individuals aged 2 12 years: 15   lsoniazid,
Rifapentine    mg/kg Individuals aged 2-11   900mg plu  years: 25 mg/kg Rifapentine:
s isoniazid
[3HP]        10.0-15.0kg = 300mg        Rifapentine, 15.1-23.0kg = 450mg        900mg
23.1--30.0 kg = 600 mg
>30.1= 900 mg
Dailyfor6

lsoniazid alone [6H]
months               300mg
Adults: 5 mg/kg
Children: 10maka (ranae 7.15
Daily for 3 months          lsoniazid, 300
lsoniazid      lsoniazid:             mg plu  Children: 10 mg/kg (range, 7-15
s rifampicin    mg/kg)

[3RHJ
Rifampicin:
Children, 15 mg/kg (range, 10-20 mg/kg)
Rifampicin,
600mg
More guidance  on  TB preventive  therapy,  especially on  new approaches,  may be  found in  the  Tuberculosis  and Leprosy Management Guidelines, Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Drug Resistant Tuberculosis and the Guidelines for Antiretroviral Therapy for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV in Zimbabwe.
Approach to new-born and under five TB contacts
An infant born to a mother with sputum positive TB should not be given BCG at birth:
•  Give the child the appropriate TPT regimen preferably 3HR, for two months.
•  After two months, perform a Tuberculin Skin test.

183

EDLIZ2020
•   If the Tuberculin skin test is positive give full TB treatment.
•   If the Mantoux test is negative continue with TPT regimen 1 month for 3HR and 4 months for 6H.
•  Follow with BCG vaccination if not contraindicated (refer to Immunization Chapter)
For all contacts of a sputum positive TB case, evaluate for signs of active TB; for children check the BCG vaccination status and vaccinate if not already done. Commence on the appropriate TPT regimen see Tables 10.3 and 10.4.
Contact investigation should be conducted to screen and manage all household and close contacts of the index (initial TB case).
Refer to the Zimbabwe Tuberculosis and Leprosy Management guidelines for additional information.

TUBERCULOSIS CASE MANAGEMENT

Diagnosis of TB
The presence of pulmonary tuberculosis should be suspected in individuals presenting with one or more of the following complaints:
•  Cough for 1 week or longer,
•  Night sweats,
•  Fever,
•  Loss of weight,
•  a BMI <17kg/m² or failure to thrive among children.

Laboratory Investigations
Every effort should be made to bacteriologically confirm the diagnosis of TB, with rapid molecular test such as the Xpert MTB/Rif test being the  preferred  diagnostic  test  for  patients  being  evaluated  for tuberculosis. A specimen should be submitted for all cases being investigated for pulmonary TB as per TB diagnostic algorithm, in order to confirm the diagnosis of Tuberculosis. (see the National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Control Guidelines)
Chest X-Rays
Chest X-ray is recommended as a priority SCREENING test for persons classified as being at high risk for tuberculosis. The following persons are classified as being at high risk for tuberculosis:

184

EDLIZ2020

•  Children under the age of 5 years.
•  People living with HIV.
•  Those who are malnourished.
•  People above 60 years of age.
•  People with diabetes mellitus.
•  People who drink alcohol excessively.
•  Miners and ex-miners.
•  People in congregate settings.
•  Inmates and correctional facility communities.
•  Health care workers.
Note: In the presence of clinical improvement, it is not necessary to monitor the response ofpulmonary TB to treatment by chest x-rays.

Tuberculin Testing
Table 10.3: Tuberculin Skin Testing

Medicine
tuberculin,
(PPD)
intradermal


purified
1 :1000
Codes
B E
Dose
0.1ml (=5TU)
Frequency  Duration


Examine induration at 48-72 hours.
•   A positive tuberculin skin test (person with normal immunity: induration > 10 mm, person with defective immunity: induration
> 5 mm) may indicate active infection (especially if strongly positive), previous infection or previous BCG.
•  Absence of a response does not exclude TB because individuals with HIV may not have sufficient immunity for a positive skin test despite active TB.
•  If a child under 3 years of age has not had BCG, the Mantoux test may be useful.





185

EDLIZ2020
TREATMENT REGIMENS FOR TB
One treatment regimen is now used in Zimbabwe for the treatment of drug sensitive TB, regardless of the treatment history. The regimen consists of a combination of the four first line medicines HRZE:
H= isoniazid            E= ethambutol
R= rifampicin            Z= pyrazinamide

These medicines are available as Fixed Dose Combination (FDC). See tables on the next page for dosing.
The intention of these combination tablets is to improve compliance by reducing the number of tablets a patient takes, and to reduce the possibility of medicine resistance developing. The number of FDC tablets is determined by a weight range of each patient at the start of treatment
• Treatment is the same for HIV infected people as for non-HIV infected.
Treatment of Drug-Sensitive TB
All drug sensitive cases of TB regardless of site, severity or previous treatment history are treated  using  the regimens summarised below (see table 10.8).
Table 10.4: Treatment of Rifampicin Sensitive TB
Regimen    Intensive Phase    Continuation Phase
4 months HR OR
(/)  �   2HRZE/4HR   2 months HRZE    6 months HR
...J l

2
0<








z
Lru
0
e0.



cii  2HRZE/4HR
h             2 months HRZE
(for TB of meninges, bone. joint, pericardium, disseminated spinal disease, the continuation phase is extended
4 months HR OR
10 months HR

...J  e0.
(for patients with TB of the
r                          meninges, bone joint,
0                            pericardium, military TB or TB
spine the continuation phase is extended



186

EDLIZ2020


General notes:
• In  all pulmonary  tuberculosis  cases,  sputum  smear examination is done at the end of two months, five months and at the end of treatment. Refer to the National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Management Guidelines for the management of a positive smear at any stage in the monitoring oftreatment.
• Children weighing less than 25kg receive paediatric FOG HRZ plus additional isoniazid and ethambutol.
•  Children weighing 25kg and above receive adult formulations and additional isoniazid.
• The total duration of treatment is 6 months (exceptions noted in this chapter).
• Children  with  tuberculous  meningitis  or  pericarditis, disseminated  or  spinal  disease  with  neurological complications should be given 10HR (continuous phase)
i.e. 10 months of isoniazid and rifampicin under direct observation.
• Adults with TB of meninges, bone, joint, pericardium, disseminated, or spinal disease should be given 6 HR (continuous phase) i.e. 6 months of isoniazid and rifampicin under direct observation.

FIXED DOSE COMBINATION OF ANT-TB MEDICINES
The essential anti-TB medicines are available as FDCs such that each tablet has a combination of 2 (2-FDC), 3 (3-FDC), or 4 (4-FDC) medicines. The FDCs available in Zimbabwe are:
•  RHZE: Rifampicin, lsoniazid, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol
•  RHZ: Rifampicin, lsoniazid and Pyrazinamide
•  RH: Rifampicin and lsoniazid
The number of FDC tablets is determined by a weight range of each patient at the start of treatment as shown in table 10.7 and table 10.9.







187

EDLIZ2020
Table 10.5: Paediatric medicines FDC dosing by weight band
Recommended Regimen
Weight Band          Intensive Phase       Continuation Phase

RHZ (75/50/150)    E (100)       RH (75/50)
4-7kg         1          1            1
8-11kg         2          2            2
12-15kg         3          3            3
16-24kg         4          4            4
25kgs and above         Use adult dosages and formulations
All patients receiving isoniazid containing regimens should receive supplemental pyridoxine
Table 10.8: Supplemental pyridoxine dosing

Medicine
pyridoxlne po
Codes  Dose      Frequency
C   E   25mg -Adults;   once daily
12.5mg Peads
Duration
for   the duration of treatment with INH


All patients receiving isoniazid containing regimens should receive supplemental pyridoxine
Table 10.6: Adult FDC Dosing by weight bands
Continuation phase - Intensive phase .2months    4 months
2(RHZE) daily           4 (HR) daily

Weight Band
(lsoniazid  75mg  +  Rifampicir (lsoniazid 75mg+ Rifampicin 150mg + pyrazinamide 400mg ' 150mg)
Ethambutol 275mg).
25-39 kg            2                  2
40-54 kg            3                  3
55-70 kg            4                  4
70 kg+            5                  5




188

EDLIZ2020
ADVERSE MEDICINE REACTION
All suspected adverse drug reactions (ADR) must be reported to the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) using spontaneous Adverse Drug Reaction reporting forms or the MCAZ online reporting platform: https://e-pv.mcar.co_rw

In the event of an adverse reaction to anti-TB medicines, stop all TB medicines and assess. If necessary, evaluate the liver function then reintroduce one medicine at a time and build up gradually. Start with isoniazid at 25mg -- the least likely to cause a reaction and end with the most likely toxic e.g. pyrazinamide in jaundice/hepatoxicily. When the required dose has been achieved without any reaction, another medicine should be re-introduced in a similar manner - slowly, increasing the dose daily, for example Table 10.12 details the management of anti-TB induced hepatitis































189

EDLIZ2020
Table 10.7: Approach to the management of Anti-TB induced hepatitis
Drug     Day
Day 1      INH 25mg
Day 2     INH 50mg
Day3     INH 100mg
Day 4     INH 300mg
Day 5     INH 300mg + R 150mg
Day 6     INH 300mg + R, 300mg
Day 7     INH 300mg + R 450mg
Day 8     INH 300mg +R 600mg (depends on weight) Day9     INH 300mg + R 600mg + E 400mg
Day 10    INH 300mg +R 600mg + E 800mg
Day 11    INH 300mg +R 600mg + E 1.2g (depends on weight) Day 12    INH 300mg +R 600mg+ E 1.2g+Z 400mg
Day 13    INH 300mg + R 600mg + E 1.2g + Z 800g Day 14    INH 300mg + R 600mg + E 1.2g + Z 1.2g
Day 15     INH 300mg + R 600mg + E 1.2g+2 1.6g (depends on weight)



Refer to the National TB Guidelines and leprosy for further guidance on management ofadverse event.
TB and HIV Co-infection
Refer to the current national ARV guidelines as well as the TB manual. Also refer to the ARV chapter in this EDLIZ
Drug Resistant Tuberculosis
Drug resistant TB (DR-TB) is the presence of bacilli resistant to one or more anti-tuberculosis medicines. Resistance patterns are defined as follows:

Mono-resistance Poly-resistance
Resistance to one first line drug only (H,
R, Z, E or S)
Resistance to more than one first line drug, excluding combination of H and R


190

EDLIZ2020



Multidrug
(MDR-TB)
resistance  Resistance to at least both H and R


Fluoroquinolone resistant tuberculosis

Rifampicin Resistance
(RR)
Resistance to fluoroquinolones with or without  resistance to other anti-TB drugs.
Resistance to rifampicin with or without resistance  to  other  anti-TB  drugs, including any resistance to Rifampicin (i.e.  including  mono-  and  poly- resistance.)


In Zimbabwe, most of patients are enrolled into the DR-TB treatment programme following an Xpert MTB/Rif test confirming resistance to rifampicin (MTB Detected/ Rif Resistance Detected.) Such patients receive the MDR-TB treatment regimen recommended (refer to Clinical Management of Drug Resistant Tuberculosis Guidelines).
While patients may have documented risk factors that predispose them to DR-TB, patients may also present with a primary episode of DR-TB with no apparent risk factors. Risk factors for developing DR- TB (or worsening the pattern or resistance) include the following:
•  Patients who remain (or again become smear positive) during or after completing a TB treatment regimen.
•  Improper treatment of TB/DR-TB which includes treatment interruptions, incorrect doses for the patient's weight
•  Contact with a DRTB patient
•  HIV infection
•  Residence in high burden DRTB regions
The management of MOR-TB or XOR-TB cases is rapidly changing with emerging evidence on more patient friendly and effective regimens. The drugs and drug grouping used in the treatment of DR- TB is shown in table 10.12. For the latest guidance and practice recommendations on the management of DR-TB, please refer to the Clinical Management of Drug Resistant Tuberculosis Guidelines.






191

EDLIZ2020
LIST OF DRUG RESISTANT TB (DR-TB) MEDICINES USED IN ZIMBABWE

Second-line medicines are B level medicines with V level of priority. However, second-line medicines are also to be found at primary health facilities for specific managing DRTB


Table 10.8: DR-TB medicines used in Zimbabwe Drug Grouping and Rationale    Medications Group A                 Bedaquiline
Drugs associated with improved
outcomes and lower mortality in  Levofloxacin or Moxifloxacin
Individual  Patient  Data/  meta-  Linezolid analysis

Group B                 Clofazimine
Drugs associated with improved    Cycloserine outcomes in IPD/meta-analysis,


Group C                 Ethambutol
Delamanid
Remaining  agents  for  regimen  Pyrazinamide construction  listed  in  order of

priority for use
Carbapenems plus clavulanic acid
Amikacin, streptomycin Ethionamide/prothionamide PAS












192

EDLIZ2020
12. TROPICAL DISEASES


ANTHRAX{CUTANEOUS) TICK TYPHUS {AFRICAN) RABIES
BILHARZIA (SCHISTOSOMA MANSONI& HAEMATOBIUM)

HELMINTHIASIS PLAGUE (BUBONIC) LEPROSY
NOTIFIABLE DISEASES











































193
194
194
195
197
199
201
201
208

EDLIZ2020
ANTHRAX(CUTANEOUS)
Case definition: an acute bacterial disease caused by Bacillus anthracis (Gram-positive). It is manifested at first by itching of an exposed skin surface, followed by a painful lesion which becomes papular, then vesiculated and eventually develops into a depressed black eschar in 2-6 days.
NB Do not take any laboratory specimens, treat on clinical and epidemiological basis.
Initial treatment, in severe cases:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency Duration
benzylpenicillin im/iv   C  V  1-2MU    4 times a initially,
day  then
then  procaine penicillin im   C  V  3gm     once daily  7-10 days

Less severe cases:

Medicine doxycycline po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequenc Duration

C  V  200mg first dose, then
100mg    once    7 days dail

avoid use of doxycycline in pregnant women and children

NB: Pulmonary form of Anthrax- refer to designated Infectious Disease Hospital

TICK TYPHUS (AFRICAN)
Case definition: a rickettsial disease (spread usually by tick bites) that has a variable onset but most often marked by sudden headache, chills, prostration, feverand general pains. A maculopapular eruption appears on the 5" -- 7th day, initially on the upper trunk followed by a spread to the entire body but usually not to the face, palms or soles. Chancre, local erythema develops on bite site with local lymphadenopathy.


Medicine
doxycycline po



If no improvement - refer
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
C  V  200mg first dose, then
100mg    once daily  7 days










194

EDLIZ2020
RABIES
Pre-amble
Rabies is a preventable disease. Strategies to prevent rabies include dog vaccination (through the veterinary department) and human pre- or post- exposure vaccination.

Human vaccination
Vaccination for adults and older children (>5yrs) use the deltoid area for younger children(<5yrs) the outer aspect of the thigh can be used. Vaccine should never be used in the gluteal area.
Prevention of Rabies in Humans
•  Pre-exposure prophylaxis
Individual pre-exposure immunisation should be offered to persons at high risk of exposure, such as animal handlers, veterinarians, National Parks and Wildlife personnel.
Preferred  Pre-exposure  prophylaxis  schedule  intradermal  (ID) regimen:


i)_2-2 vaccination schedule
Medicine        Codes       Adult dose

Frequency  Duration


rabies vaccine, human diploid cell lntradermal ID
2-2: Dose and Site(s)
BV       0.1ml
(>0.5 IU)
once     day 0
and 7
Alternative Pre-exposure immunisation schedule intramuscular (IM)
regimen :


ii) 1-1 vaccination schedule
Medicine         Codes
rabies vaccine, human  B  V diploid cell im

Adult dose 0.5ml (>2.5IU/IM
dose)

Frequency Duration
single doses on Day 0
and 7
Give a booster every 2-3 yearifserological testing is not available to monitor antibody titre which should be >0.5IU/ml
Post-exposure Prophylaxis (PEP)
In dog and other animal bites, the wound should be thoroughly cleaned with povidone-iodine or soap and waler as soon as possible.
Exposure Categories and Appropriate Management
Category I  Feeding, touching or licks to intact skin  No PEP


195



Category
II
Category
Ill
EDLIZ2020
Nibbling of skin, minor abrasions, scratches without bleeding

Transdermal bites, scratches, saliva mucous membranes contamination


give PEP


give immunoglobin (RIG)and PEP'
• If RIG (rabies immunoglobin) not available proceed with PEP

Prophylaxis:
In an individual where there is a high risk of rabies, i.e.:
•  Category II and 111 exposure
•  Uncertain animal vaccination history or strong suspicion of rabid animal give:
Preferred cheaper and shorter vaccination using the 7day ID multi-site regimen:
2-2-2 vaccination schedule:
Medicine         Codes    Adult dose  Frequency   Duration


rabies    vaccine  B   V (human diploid cell) intradermal    (ID)
deltoid area
0.1ml   once only    day 0,3,7


Alternative vaccination using the abbreviated IM (>2.51U/IM dose) 21 day multi-site regimen:
2-1-1 vaccination schedule:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
rabies vaccine (human  B  V  0.5ml in    one dose   on day 0 diploid cell) im            each arm
(upper arm site)        then 0.5ml in    one dose   on days 7
one arm          and 21
Use a separate syringe and needle for each dose; store vials at 4-8C after reconstitution and use as soon as possible. Opened vials should be used within 6-8 hours
Use of Human Rabies lmmunoglobin (RIG) for passive
immunization
•   In case of category Ill exposure, human RIG should be infiltrated at the wound site after thorough washing with soap and water or with betadine.



196

EDLIZ2020


Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration

human rabies        B  V  10 IU/kg   once only immunoglobulin (RIG}
(instilled and infiltrated locally around the wound}
and  human rabies        B  V  10 IU/kg   once only immunoglobulin im
(gluteal)


Notes
•  In case of bile from domestic animal WITH LAPSED immunisation against rabies
»  Follow the above recommended vaccination schedule, but without giving immunoglobulin.
•  In previously vaccinated individuals give one site intradermal (ID) or one-site intramuscular (IM) vaccine on day 0,3 only.
•  Rabies vaccines labelled for IM use can be used safely via the ID route, even if this constitutes off-label use
•  In the case of exposure to confirmed rabid animals vaccine should be given regardless of the time since exposure even years afterwards
•  A change in route of administration during PEP or PreP is acceptable if such a change is unavoidable.

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR BILHARZIA, INTESTINAL WORMS, LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS AND BLINDING TRACHOMA
GENERAL NOTES
Zimbabwe is annually instituting Mass Drug (Medicine) Administration (MDA) for bilharzia, intestinal worms, lymphatic filariasis and blinding trachoma to Pre and School Aged Children (Pre-SAC and SAC) as well as adults  in  endemic districts  using WHO guidelines  for preventive chemotherapy.
BILHARZIA (SCHISTOSOMA MANSONI & HAEMATOBIUM)
Proper diagnosis can only be made by microscopy of urine and stools. Antibody tests alone are insufficient basis for treatment.
Health  Facility without microscopy diagnosis can treat Schistosoma haematobium infection in children and adolescents on the basis of visible


197

EDLIZ2020
haematuria or positive urine strip test for blood and or protein. Refer all suspected cases of Schistosoma mansoni for further investigations, particularly in the older patient.
NB. In female patients exclude haematuria caused by menstruation
S. Mansoni
Most patients with S. Mansoni infection have minimal or no symptoms unless there is heavy infestation. Infection should be suspected in young patients with unexplained iron deficiency anaemia, hepatosplenomegaly or non-resolving chronic salmonella infections.
Occasionally patients may present with dysentery like symptoms when colonic polyps due to S. Mansoni ulcerate and bleed.
Treatment:
S. Haematobium
Medicine      Codes    Children   Frequency  Duration
and Adult dose
praziquantel po  C  E    40mg/kg   one dose only

S. Mansoni:

Medicine prazlquantel po

General notes:
Codes
C E
Adult dose Frequency 40 mg/kg  once a day
Duration
repeat at 4 weeks
•  Do not give praziquantel in pregnancy. Treat after delivery.
•  Praziquantel is generally available as a double-scored 600mg tablets. Using a 40mg/kg body weight dose, the patient should be given a dose to the nearest quarter tablet (150mg).
Example: The dose for a 70 kg person is 2800 mg (70kg x 40mg). The patient should be given four- and three-quarter tablets (2850 mg, the closest convenient dose).
Treatment with praziquantel will also eliminate any roundworm infestation.
In Mass Drug Administration (MDA campaign) a dose pole is used for administration of praziquantel.

KATAYAMA SYNDROME
This is a severe immunological reaction to recent heavy infection with Schistosoma mansoni or haematobium causing fever and acute serum sickness. Treat with:
Medicine      Codes  Adult and  Frequency  Duration children
dose
198

EDLIZ2020


Medicine
Codes Adult and  Frequency  Duration children
dose
praziquantel po  C  E  40mg/kg   one dose   repeat after 2 weeks and  prednisolone po  B  V  50mg, once a day, reducing by 5mg per day
according to response.
H ELMINTH IASIS
General Notes
Prevention: transmission of helminths can be reduced by measures such as thorough cooking of meat and fish, use of latrines, wearing shoes, washing hands. Attention to the hands and nails is particularly important in the case of pinworm. Health promotion to prevent re-infection is very important.  Endemic  districts  can  conduct  Mass  Drug/medicine Administration (MDA) once a year.
The diagnosis should be confirmed by examination of stool for helminths and stool microscopy for eggs; peri-anal swab placed in saline for pinworm.
In the case of pinworm, threadworms (enterobius), the whole family should be treated. The first-choice treatment for all of the above infestations is albendazole, a broad-spectrum anthelmintic. Note also that treatment or bilharzia with praziquantel would also have eliminated roundworms.
Caution: Safety in pregnancy has not been established for albendazole; do NOTuse in the first trimester ofpregnancy. In most cases, treatment can be given AFTER delivery.
•  All Roundworms except Strongyloides

Medicine albendazole po
Codes Adult dose
C  E  400mg
<2yrs = 200mg
Frequency  Duration
one dose only
•  Tapeworm and Strongyloides

Medicine albendazole po
Codes Adult dose
C  E  400mg
<2yrs = 200mg
Frequency  Duration once a day 3 days°
Note: If not cured after 3 weeks, repeat the course.
•  Cutaneous larva migrans ("sandworm")
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  Duration

albendazole po  C  E  400mg
<2yrs=200m
9
•  Cysticercosis and Neurocysticercosis
Specialist inpatient treatment is required.
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose praziquantel po    C  E  17mg/kg

199
once a day  7 days





Frequency  Duration 3 times a day 15 days

EDLIZ2020
and  prednisolone po    B  V  15mg    2times a day  18 days"
Note: predniso/one therapy must start 2-3 days before praziquantel.
•  Hydatid Disease
Refer to central hospital. Serological confirmation is required before treatment commenced.
Do not aspirate the cysts. Surgery is the treatment of choice. If inoperable: Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration albendazole po      C  E  3mg/kg   3 times a day 30 days, then
wait 15 days (medicine free). Then repeat the cycle 4 times.
Monitor progress with ultrasound.

LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS (ELEPHANTIASIS)

Case Definition: Hydrocoele, lymphoedema, elephantiasis or chyluria in a resident of an endemic area for which other causes of these findings have been excluded.
Causative organisms:
Lymphatic filariasis is caused by the following nematodes
1.  Wuchereria Bancrofti (most common)
2.  Brugia Malayi
3.  Brugia Timori

The infection is transmitted by mosquitoes of the anopheles and culicine species. The disease is prevalent in 39 of 63 districts in Zimbabwe which require at least 7 rounds of Mass Drug Administration (MDA) using Albendazole and Diethylcarbamazine (DEC). The use of triple therapy Albendazole, DEC and lvemerctin can shorten the MDA rounds to only 2 or 3.
Clinical Manifestations:

There are three stages of the disease:
Early stage:
Due to infective larvae comprising a triad of eosinophilia, lymphadenopathy and a positive intradermal test. Some patients may be asymptomatic.
Acute  Filarial  Manifestation:  patients  have  fever,  lymphangitis, lymphadenitis and relapsing lymphoedema of various body parts e.g. epididymo-orchitis in males.
Chronic stage: gross persistent lymphoedema of limbs, scrotum, breast or vulva in females.
Diagnosis: this is based on a combination of a clinico-epidemiological information and sometimes demonstration of microfilariae in a blood or fluid smear.
Treatment of the acute phase involves use of Diethylcarbamazine (DEC).

200

EDLIZ2020


Medicine        Codes  Adult dose    Frequency   Duration

diethylcarbamazine  B  E   100mg-300mg po
and  albendazole po     C  V   400mg
Weight dependent
single dose single dose
Patients should be referred for specialist management.
Drug therapy for chronic elephantiasis does not alter the eventual clinical outcome. Surgery for hydrocoele is indicated with local care of the limbs through daily cleaning/hygiene, elevation, exercise and use of foot ware.

BLINDING TRACHOMA
Refer lo Common Eye condition chapter

PLAGUE (BUBONIC)
•  Case definition: Any person with rapid onset of fever, chills, headache, severe malaise, prostration with extremely painful swelling of lymph nodes, orcough with blood-stained sputum, chest pain and difficulty in breathing in an area known to have plague.


Treat with:
Medicine streptomycin im

Codes
B  V

Adult dose 1g
0.5g

Frequency
first dose 6hourly

Duration then
10 days
Paed = 5-10mg/kg
or   chloramphenicol imfiv  8  V 125-25mg9
Paed = 6.25-12.5mg/kg  hourly


•  Prophylaxis whilst nursing & contacts:

Medicine doxycycline po

LEPROSY
Codes Adult dose C  V  100mg
Frequency  Duration 2times a day 10 days

All patients should be referred to the Provincial TB/Leprosy Co- ordinator (PTBLCO) or specialist for confinnation of diagnosis. Notification is mandatory.
Classification of Leprosy
Knowledge of the classification of leprosy is important for choosing the appropriate Multi Drug Therapy (MDT) regimen. The classification can be
201

EDLIZ2020
based on clinical  manifestations and/ or skin smear results.  In the classification based on skin smear results, patients showing negative smears at all sites are grouped as paucibacil/ary leprosy (PB), while those showing positive smears at any site are grouped as having multibacillary leprosy (MB).
The clinical system of classification for the purpose of treatment includes the use of the number of lesions and nerves involved as the basis for grouping leprosy patients into MB and PB. The clinical classification is shown below:
Classification of leprosy
SIE     PAUCIBACILLARY LEPROSY   MULTIBACILLARY LEPROSY
Skin Lesions    1-5 lesions asymmetrically   More than 5 lesions. distributed with definite loss   Distributed more
of sensation           symmetrically. With or without loss of sensation
Nerve        Only one nerve trunk      Many nerve trunks involved enlargement     involved

Any patient showing a positive skin smear should be treated with the MDT regimen  for mullibacillary  (MB) leprosy,  irrespective  of the clinical classification. When classification is in doubt, the patient should be treated as MB leprosy.
Primary Prevention
Screening of family contacts should be performed.


Medicine BCG vaccine
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C  V  see section on Immunisation

Treatment of Paucibacillary Patients

Medicine dapsone po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency B  V  100mg    once a day
Paed = 1-2mg/kg
Duration 6 months

and  rifampicin po
supervised dose
B  V  600mg
Paed = 10-15mg/
kg'
once a month
6 months
but not less than 150 mg ofrifampicin

Treatment of Multibacillary Patients
Duration of therapy is now reduced to 12 months, with adequate education and follow up.
• At the time of stopping treatment, it is important to educate the patients about the signs and symptoms or relapse and reaction and request them to come back immediately.
202

EDLIZ2020
•  Lepromatous or borderline lepromatous patients who return not showing any improvement or with evidence of deterioration will need an additional 12 months of MDT for multibacillary leprosy.
• Review patients regularly for 12months to diagnose deterioration as early as possible.

Treat with:
Medicine    Codes     Adult dose   Frequency   Duration
dapsone po     B  V     100mg    once a day  12 months Paed =1-2mg/kg
and    clofazimine po    A  N     50mg    once a day  12 months
Paed = 0.5-1mg/kg
and    clofazimine po    A  N     300mg    once a     12 months supervised dose       Paed = 5-10mg/kg  month
and     rifampicin po    B  V     600mg    once a     12months
Paed =10-15mg/kg month
"Not less than 150 mg of rifampicin.
MDT should be supplied in 28-day blister packs for ease of ordering and to avoid medicine wastage. Specific blister packs are available for children.

Reversal Reaction (Type I Reaction)
This is a cell-mediated immune reaction to mycobacterium leprae. It is characterised by swelling of skin lesions that become oedematous, red and tender. New lesions may appear. Peripheral nerves may become swollen and tender, with loss of sensation and paralysis in the distribution of the nerves involved. The reactions can occur before MDT is commenced or after completion of MDT, but they are commonest during the first 3 months of MDT. The full dose of anti-leprosy medicines must be continued in addition to treatment of the reaction.
Mild Reversal Reaction
A reaction in which only the skin, not the nerves, are involved:

Medicine
aspirin po    C
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
V   600mg  4 times a day  1-2 weeks
If there is no improvement, consider treatment with corticosteroids. If there is evidence of neuritis (tender nerves, nerve deficit) use corticosteroids as below. Do not wait for nerve damage to appear as it may be too late for function to return.





203

EDLIZ2020

Severe Reversal Reaction
A reaction in which there is also new nerve damage with loss of sensation and /or motor function in hands, feet or eyes.
'New' implies additional to what the patient already had at registration or developed within the last 6 months.
Admit to hospital. Treat with corticosteroid:

Medicine    Codes  Adult dose Frequency prednisolone po  B  V  40mg (or  once a day
1mg/kg)
Duration
then  reduce slowly by 5mg each week, once
nerve tenderness subsides
then maintain at   20-mg=  o-nce-a day'   2-3-m-ont-hs -

then  reduce slowly over 1-2
months
total 6 months
Patients can be discharged at the dosage of 20 mg daily for subsequent outpatient review.

Erythema Nodosum Leprosum (ENL) Type II reaction
In this reaction immune complex formation and deposition occurs with the activation of complement. This type of reaction is characterised by crops of tender subcutaneous nodules on the face, trunk and extensor surfaces of the limbs. It may include systemic features such as fever, lymphadenitis, orchitis, arthritis, nephritis, iridocyclitis and peripheral neuritis. Severe ENL may also present with ulcerating and pustular lesions. The full dose of anti- leprosy medicines should be continued in addition to the treatment of the reaction.
Mild Type II Reaction
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose Frequency    Duration aspirin po    C  V  600mg  4 times a day  1-2 weeks
If there is no improvement or the patient develops nerve damage, corticosteroids are indicated.

Severe Type II Reaction
Admit for corticosteroid therapy and refer to specialist urgently:

Medicine prednisolone po
Codes
B V
then
Adult dose Frequency  Duration
40-60mg  once a day  1-2 weeks
reduce slowly by 5mg-10mg each week, over a period of 4-6 weeks;
total duration = 6-10weeks



204

EDLIZ2020

Recurrent    Type    II   Reaction

Use clofazimine in anti-inflammatory dosage in addition to prednisolone. Attempt to taper prednisolone while maintaining clofazimine as below:
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency      Duration clofazimine po   A  N    100mg   3 times a day    3 months
then   100mg  2 times a day    3 months then   100mg   once a day     6 months

Refer all patients developing abdominal complaints (pain, constipation, distension).

It may take 4 to 6 weeks for clofazimine to take effect in controlling ENL.

Steroid side-effects
• Be on the alert for new onset of diabetes or exacerbation of known diabetes. Diabetes will need careful monitoring - ideally as an inpatient.
• Blood pressure should also be monitored.
• Also watch for tuberculosis or gastrointestinal parasitic infections that might be revealed by the use of steroids.
• If difficulties arise in balancing treatment of reactions and side effects, refer for specialist care.
All patients should be managed at primary care level under the guidance of District and Provincial TB/Leprosy Co-ordinators. Complicated cases should be referred to the Tropical Diseases Unit at Harare Central Hospital. Advice can be obtained from the Leprosy Mission on telephone Harare +263( 4) 251647.

HUMAN AFRICAN TRYPANOSOMIASIS

General notes

Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT) is caused by the protozoa of the genus trypanosoma that is transmitted by the bite of tsetse fly in sub- Saharan Africa. The disease is also known as sleeping sickness and has been  reported from  remote areas, mainly from the game  parks  in Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland West and Matebeleland North.

There are two forms of HAT:
•  Trypanosoma brucei rhodisiense -- found in East and Southern Africa
•  Trypanosoma brucei gambiense -- found mainly in Central and West Africa.
205

EDLIZ2020
Clinical Presentation has 2 phases
Acute haemolymphatic phase: presentation is with episodic bouts of fever, headache, joint pains, pruritis and anorexia. An eschar, "bite site" may be present together with local lymphadenopathy.
Delayed Neurological phase: when the parasite crosses the blood brain barrier  ii  causes  neurological  signs  and  symptoms  of sleep  cycle disturbance, confusion, behavioural changes and poor coordination.

Refer all cases of Human African trypanosomiasis for specialist care. Acute haemolymphatic phase cases are to be referred to the two Provincial hospitals Chinhoyi and Bindura, for management of. All cases should be referred to Harare Central Hospital for further management.

Suramin is the medicine of choice for the acute haemolymphatic phase.


Medicine   Codes suramin iv  A  V
Adult dose  Frequency
4-5 mg/kg Once
Duration
on day 1 as test dose
then            20 mg/kg   on day 1,3,7,14,21



Melarsoprol is required if the patient progresses to the neurological phase.


Medicine    Codes melarsoprol  S  V
I



TYPHOID FEVER
Adult dose   Frequency  Duration
2.16 mg/kg/day for 10 consecutive days

Typhoid fever is caused by Salmonella typhi a Gram-negative bacterium. A very similar but often less severe disease is caused by the Salmonella serotype paratyphi A.

Humans are the only natural host and reservoir. The infection is transmitted by ingestion of faecally contaminated food or water.

Case Definition
Any person with gradual onset of steadily increasing and then persistently high fever, chills, malaise, headache, sore throat, cough, and sometimes abdominal pain and constipation or diarrhoea.




206

EDLIZ2020
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of typhoid fever varies from a mild illness with low grade fever, malaise and dry cough to a severe clinical picture with abdominal discomfort, altered mental status and multiple complications.
Clinical diagnosis is difficult to make as it is confused with many similar conditions. In the absence of laboratory confirmation, any case of fever of at least 38 C for 3 or more days is considered suspect if the epidemiological context is suggestive.
Depending on the clinical setting and quality of available medical care, some 5-10% of typhoid patients may develop serious complications, the most frequent being intestinal haemorrhage or peritonitis due to intestinal perforation.

Laboratory Testing
In Zimbabwe, blood culture samples, stool/rectal swab and bone marrow aspirate have been used to culture for isolation of S typhi.
Blood culture is the usual diagnostic test with a sensitivity of 90% (60% to 80%) in the first week of onset of fever. Stool and rectal swabs yield positive results in up to 40% of the cases.
Case Management
More than 90% of patients can be managed at home with oral antimicrobials, minimal nursing care, and close medical follow-up for complications or failure to respond to therapy.

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF TYPHOID FEVER UNCOMPLICATED TYPHOID DISEASE

i) Susceptibility: Fully Sensitive
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose Frequency ciprofloxacin po  B  V   500mg   twice a day
or   ofloxacin po    S  E   400mg   once a day

Duration 5-7days 5-7days



ii)Susceptibility: Multidrug Resistant TB
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose azithromycin po   C  V  250 - 500mg
or   cefixime po      B  V  500 -- 750mg

COMPLICATED TYPHOID DISEASE

Frequency once a day
once daily

Duration 7 days
7-14days

i) Susceptibility: Fully Sensitive
Medicine     Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
ciprofloxacin po B  V   500mg   twice daily   10-14days
or   ofloxacin po   B  N   400mg   once daily   10-14days


207

EDLIZ2020

ii) Susceptibility: Multidrug Resistant
Medicine      Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  Duration
azithromycin po C  V   250-500mg  once daily   10-14days


or  cefixime po

Alternative Medicines Medicine ceftriaxone iv
B  V   500-750mg  once daily


Codes  Adult dose  Frequency C  V  1g     once daily
10-14days


Duration
10-14 days

Dehydration is uncommon in Typhoid fever; however, electrolyte imbalance, hypoglycaemia and hypokalaemia and hyponalremia frequently occur and need lo be corrected using appropriate electrolyte solution. In cases where intestinal perforation is suspected surgery and parenteral nutrition may be required. In cases of moderate lo severe dehydration, follow the guideline for treatment of dehydration.

A. Treatment of Carriers
An individual is considered to be a chronic carrier if he or she is asymptomatic and continues to have positive stool or rectal swab cultures for S. typhi a year following recovery from acute illness:


Medicine ciprofloxacin po
Codes Adult dose
B  V  750mg
Frequency twice daily
Duration
4 weeks

Ciprofloxacin can be used in children if the benefits outweigh the potential harms.
And/or:
•  Cholecystectomy if lithiasis is present
•  Treat schistosomiasis if present
•  Vi (virulence) antibody test useful to screen carriers

NOTIFIABLE DISEASES AND EVENTS OF PUBLIC HEALTH IMPORTANCE
According to the Public Health Act (PHA) Chapter 15.09, there are infectious diseases that have to be immediately notified to health authority in an area by either District Medical Officer, or Provincial Medical Director, or City Health Director. These diseases can spread rapidly and cause outbreaks. They need closer monitoring if they are lo be controlled. II is important that the health authority knows what action has been taken to control the spreading of the diseases. It is also a requirement that Zimbabwe reports cases and deaths from these diseases to the WHO (Wortd Health


208

EDLIZ2020
Organization). While there is a longer list of diseases in the PHA, health workers are encouraged to notify the following using the T1/T2 forms:

1.  Acute flaccid paralysis (AFP/polio)
2.  Anthrax
3.  Brucellosis
4.  Cholera
5.  COVID-19
6.  Diphtheria
7.  Hepatitis (all forms)
8.  Human Influenza A caused by a new subtype ( e.g. H1N1, H1 N5)
9.  Meningococcal Meningitis
10. Noma
11. Plague
12. Poliomyelitis/ Acute Flaccid Paralysis
13. Rabies
14. SARS
15.  TB {Tuberculosis} and Leprosy are also notifiable, but they continue to be notified on TB Form A and TB Form B for TB, and the Leprosy form for leprosy.
16. Trypanosomiasis
17. Typhoid
18. Typhus
19. Viral Haemorrhagic fever (e.g. Ebola, Marburg, Crimean Congo)
20. Yellow fever
21.  All such other infectious/ communicable diseases and events of public health importance as the Minster of Health & Child Care may declare by statutory instrument, to be infectious diseases throughout or in any part of Zimbabwe. These events of public health importance include maternal deaths, disasters such as chemical spillage, floods and others.

How to notify: Any healthcare worker, including those in private sector, who comes into contact with any of the notifiable diseases and all suspected and laboratory confirmed cases of the above should be notified immediately to the District Medical Officer or City Health Director by the fastest means possible (telephone if available}. The notifying healthcare worker should then complete a T1 form in triplicate. These forms can be obtained from the offices of District Medical Officer or City Health Director upon request.








209

EDLIZ2020

13. MALARIA


GENERAL NOTES MEDICINE PROPHYLAXIS TREATMENT OF MALARIA
TREATMENT IN SPECIAL GROUPS TREATMENT FAILURE
SEVERE MALARIA

ARTESUNATE RECONSTITUTION
TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA IN PREGNANCY TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA IN COMMUNITY TREATMENT OF MALARIA IN ELIMINATION AREAS




































210
211
211
212
213
215
217
220
223
224
225

EDLIZ2020
GENERAL NOTES:
•The pattern of malaria varies geographically. Plasmodium falciparum causes almost all the malaria in Zimbabwe, with a few cases due to P. vivax, P.ovale and P.malariae may be seen.
• Complications occur mainly with P.falciparum and usually in young children, pregnant women, adults in epidemic prone areas and people moving from areas of no malaria to areas with malaria including immune compromised patients and sicklers.
•Malaria usually occurs 1-6 weeks after a bile by an infected female anopheles mosquito. So, it is important to take a good history and to always ask about travel and self-medication.

MALARIA PREVENTION
Social and behaviour change and communication on non-pharmacological means of prevention  is extremely  important.  Communities must be encouraged to use preventive methods such as indoor residual spraying, use of mosquito coils, repellents, long lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets and wear, appropriate protective clothing.

MEDICINE PROPHYLAXIS
Due to lack of evidence of efficacy on antimalarial prophylaxis in Zimbabwe coupled with suspected poor performance of the previously used medicines, personal protection is highly recommended. This is to avoid giving a false sense of protection to those visiting malarious areas.
Personal protection can be achieved by sleeping under a net, use of repellents when visiting a malarious area, putting on long sleeved clothes during dusk or dawn and getting indoors earty. Where medicines are used, it is important to note that no medicine gives 100% protection against malaria, but medicines do reduce the risk. However, chemoprophylaxis is recommended in pregnant women as indicated below:

Malaria prophylaxis for:

Intermittent Preventive Treatment (IPTp)

•  Pregnant women in regions of moderate to high transmission.
Chemoprophylaxis in this group in based on an assumption that every pregnant woman in a malaria-endemic area is infected with malaria and has malaria parasites in the blood or in the placenta. The medication is given at treatment doses and at prescribed intervals.




211

EDLIZ2020
•  Three tablets of SP (each SP tablet contains Sulphadoxine 500 mg and Pyrimethamine 25 mg) are given at booking (after quickening).
•  Give SP to all pregnant women at each scheduled ANC visit up to time of delivery
• The doses should be given at least 4 weeks apart
• SP should ideally be given as directly observed therapy (DOTS) of three tablets
• SP can be given on either an empty stomach or with food
•  SP should NOT be administered to women receiving Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis due lo an increased risk of adverse effects
•  II is recommended that weekly folic acid also be given to pregnant woman  taking  IPTp.  (This  is  done  in  conjunction  with  the Reproductive Health Department).

Malaria prophylaxis for:
•  Visitors from outside the country
They may continue with the prophylaxis recommended to them before coming to Zimbabwe, but personal protection should be emphasized.

TREATMENT OF MALARIA
All antimalarial medicines should be administered only to confirmed cases (Confirmation is done by ROT or Malaria Blood Slide). However, in children less than five years treatment may be initiated whilst awaiting blood results provided other causes of fever have been clinically excluded.
Malaria blood slides MUST be taken in the following cases:
•  Patients with severe/ complicated malaria,
•  Patients with treatment failure,
•  All referrals,
•  All cases where Co-artemether has been used in the preceding 2weeks
•  All ROT confirmed cases in malaria elimination areas
Note: Pregnant women diagnosed with malaria must receive medicine therapy immediately. Although quinine is potentially teratogenic, the benefit ofgiving quinine therapy far outweighs any risk.

Uncomplicated malaria
The first line treatment of uncomplicated malaria is the artemisinin combined therapy Artemether-lumefantrine (Co-artemether).


212

EDLIZ2020

Medicine             Codes  Dose     Frequency  Duration artemether·lumefantrine po   C  V  see table
below
(Co-artemether) Artemether-Lumefantrine (1.5mg/12mg/kg):
To be given as a Bose course of tablets twice a day for 3 days as follows:

Dosage          Day 1       Day 2       Day 3
Weight (kg)   Age (yrs)  Stat  After    AM   PM    AM     PM
Dose 8hrs

5- 14      <3      1      1    1    1     1      1
15-24      3-8      2     2    2    2     2      2
25-34      9-14     3      3    3    3     3      3
>35       >14     4      4    4    4     4      4
Note:







N.B:
•  'Strictly after 8 hours.
•   Parasitological proof of malaria by blood slide or rapid diagnostic test (ROT) is desirable wheneverArtemisinin based combination is used
•   Tablet of Co-artemether- is a fixed dose formulation ofArtemether 20mg/Lumefantrine120mg
1.lf the initial dose of Coartemether is vomited within 30 minutes repeat dose.
2. If vomiting is persistent treat as severe/complicated malaria.
3. If no improvement within 48 hours change to oraArtesunate/amodiaquine.
.fo ensure compliance it is desirable to give the STAT doses as Directly Observed Therapy (DOT).
5. Malaria in the 1 trimester of pregnancy should be treated with a 7-day course of oral quinine and clindamycin.

TREATMENT IN SPECIAL GROUPS
Uncomplicated malaria in infants under 5kg body weight.
Children less than 5kg body weight should be given Co-artemether (Artemether-Lumefantrine) as the first line treatment for uncomplicated malaria. Children less than 2kg body weight should be treated as severe malaria cases.


213

EDLIZ2020

The dos.Inq scihetdureI I.s as Si1hown below
Treatment Schedule for co+artemether children less than 5kg body weight Weight in  Equivalent   Dosage(mls) Dissolve 1tab Artemether-
kgs     dose ACT    Lumefantrine (ACT) (20mg/120mg) with 10mls of 20mg/120mg   clean water-
dispersible tablets
Day 1        Day 2           Da v3
AM    PM    AM    PM    AM    PM
2kg-<3kg   ½tab       5ml    5ml    5ml    5ml    5ml    5ml 3kg-<4kg   1 tab       10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml 4kg-<5kg   1 tab       10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml   10ml
Remember treat children <2kg as severe malaria
Uncomplicated malaria in pregnancy
•  First Trimester

Medicine       Codes  Dose     Frequency  Duration quinine po      c  V  see table  free Tmes
below          7 days
Plus   clindamycin po    B  V  see table  three times
below

•  Second Trimester up to delivery

Medicine      Codes  Dose    Frequency  Duration

artemether - lumefantrine 201120mg Po
C V  see table
below
















214

EDLIZ2020

TRIMESTER/APPROXIMATE GESTATION

1st trimester-before        2° and 3trimester --after quickening quickening
Medicine            Medicine     DAY 1       DAY 2   DAY3 STAT  After   AM PM  A M  P M
8
hrs
quinine po   600mg    Co.      4     4     4   4    4    4
every 8   artemether
hrs for 7  (No. of
davs     tabletsl clindamycin  300mg
po        every  8           Twelve hours apart from day 2 to day 3 hours for
7 days

TREATMENT FAILURE
Treatment failure, should be suspected clinically if there is no response after
48 hours of correct therapy, and a change to second line therapy made immediately.
Early treatment failure is formally diagnosed if a patient is still febrile 72hrs after initial therapy and has more than 25% of initial asexual parasitaemia.
Late treatment failure is the recurrence of fever and asexual parasitaemia 7 -
14 days after initial successful treatment.
Treatment failure may be due to:
• Inadequate therapy, e.g. medicine being vomited within 1/2 hour, under dosing or failure to complete the treatment
• Presence of undetected severe and complicated malaria
• Malaria parasite resistance (known or suspected) to the given medicine. If a patient returns to the health facility still feeling unwell:
•  Check for other conditions e.g. meningitis, ARI, gastro-enteritis
•  Check for signs of severe and complicated malaria
•  Take a blood slide
If there are no signs of severe/complicated malaria give the following treatment immediately:







215

EDLIZ2020
Second Line Therapy -
Medicine             Codes   Dose   Frequency  Duration
artesunate/amodiaquine po    CV    as  per once daily  3 days
table below


Each tablet of AS-AQ may contain Artesunate 25mg and Amodiaquine
67.5mg OR Artesunate 50mg and Amodiaquine 135mg OR Artesunate 100mg and Amodiaquine 270mg
Dosage is 4mglkg body weight Artesunate and 10mglkg Amodiaquine base taken once daily orally for three days.

Weight  range
(approximate       Dosage     Day 1    Day 2   Day3
aae ranael
25kg to <9kg (2 -  25mg Artesunate
11 months)    4             1 tablet   1 tablet   1 tablet
67.5    mg
Amodiaquine
29kg to <18kg (1  50mg
year- 5years)  Artesunate  4    1 tablet   1 tablet   1 tablet
Amodiaquine 100mg Artesunate
218kg to 36kg ( 6-  +    270mg   1 tablet  1 tablet   1 tablet
13 years)   Amodiaquine

236kg (14 years  100mg Artesunate
and above)   4     270mg   2      2 tablets   2 tablets
Amodiaquine    tablets

SECOND LINE TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED MALARIA IN  ADULTS  UNABLE  TO  TOLERATE  ARTESUNATE-
AMODIAQUINE IS ORAL QUININE WITH DOXYCYCLINE OR CLINDAMYCIN
Each Quinine tablet contains quinine sulphate 300mg









216

EDLIZ2020
Treatment schedule for second line therapy: Adults

Medicine     Codes   Dose      Frequency    Duration quinine po   C   V   600mg     every 8 hours  7 days doxycycline  C   V   100mg     once daily    7days
po
or  clindamycin  B   V   300mg     every 8hrs    7 days po

N.B:-
1.  'Doxycycline is contraindicated in children below 8 years and in pregnancy and these patients should complete the 7 day quinine course.
2. Clindamycin is used in place of Doxycyc/ine in pregnancy during the
first trimester and children under the age of eight years. (see Treatment in Special Groups: Uncomplicated Malaria in Pregnancy)
3. If for any reason Quinine is given as monotherapy (without Doxycycline or Clindamycin), it should be given for a total of seven days.

SEVERE MALARIA
This is a life-threatening condition, and the goal of management is to prevent death. Therapy should be initiated without delay.
Check for signs of:
• prostration, i.e. if the patient is unable to stand or sit or feed independently, (children will be unable to breastfeed)
• persistent vomiting
• the slightest sign of alteration in consciousness which may indicate cerebral malaria (refer to the Coma Scale).
Complications include any of the following:
•  Cerebral malaria
•  Bleeding tendencies
•  Severe anaemia (Hb< or=6g/dl); (Hb < 7.5g/dl for non-immune patients)
•  Hyperpyrexia
•  Jaundice
•  Shock
•  Severe haemoglobinuria
•  Hyperparasitaemia (>5% in non-immune patients)
•  Acute renal failure
•  Respiratory distress
•  Hypoglycaemia


217

EDLIZ2020
Treatment of severe/complicated malaria must be parenteral, and the medicine of choice is artesunate while quinine will remain a usable option.
Treatment at Health Centre
At primary level, parenteral therapy with artesunate injection must be commenced by IM administration or, if it is practical, by IV infusion before the patient is referred. Treatment is initiated by a loading dose of artesunate or quinine.


Medicine
artesunate im/iv
Codes
c  V
Dose    Frequency
2.4mg/kg Dose 1: stat
Dose 2: after 12hrs Dose 3: after 24hrs Dose 4 onwards: daily
Duration
minimum 3 doses before  switch  to oral      upon
improvement


Dosage at 2.4 mg/kg (comprehensive dosage schedule). Weight    5kg-25kg   26kg-50kg   51kg-75kg   76kg-100kg 60mgvial    1        2        3       4

Instructions for reconstitution and dilution of parenteral Artesunate for intravenous (IV) use.
Reconstitute the artesunate powder with the 1 ml of sodium bicarbonate ampoule provided. The solution will initially look cloudy. Wait for 1 minute for it to clear. Discard the solution if it does not clear. Add 5 mis of 5% dextrose in water or normal saline to the reconstituted solution. The resultant 6ml solution will contain 10mg per ml Artesunate. Check the dose from table below to administer.
Dosing Schedule
• Give a minimum of 3 parenteral doses of Artesunate before changing to oral treatment, even if the patient is able to take oral medication early

• Prepare a fresh solution for each injection

• Intravenous injection is given as slow bolus, about 4 mis per minute.

• Discard any unused solution.






218

EDLIZ2020
Dosing schedule

Day 1     Day 1   Day 2   Day 3   Day 4   Day 5   Day 6   Day 7

Stat Dose  12 hrs  24 hrs  Daily   Daily   Daily   Daily   Daily
1        Dose2  Dose3  Dose4  Dose 5  Dose6  Dose 7  Dose 8



Check the dose to give intravenously on table below:
Weight       Dose (mg)        Volume (ml) 5-8kg     UU               4
9-12kg    30            3
13-16 kg       40            4
17-20Kg       DU               2
225Kg       OU                D
26-29 kg      70            7
30-33 kg      80            0
34-37 kg      90            3'
38-41kg      100            10
42-45kg      110            11
46-50 kg      120            12
51-54 kg      1330           13
pt-b8 Kg      140            14
po-bZ Kg       1bu              1b
b-bb Kg      1oU             10
b/-4UKg      1/U            l/
11-tbKg       1U              18
76-79 kg      190           19
80-83 kg      200            Uu
84-87 kg      210           21
[88-91kg       44U              44
92-95kg       cu            4'
96-100 kg      240            24
• Once the patient is able to take oral medication (and has received at least 3 doses) switch to oral Co-artemether for a full three-day course (see Table for Co-artemether course).

• If the patient is unable to take any oral medication continue with intravenous Artesunate for a total of seven days (see Table above).

• Continue to evaluate the patient regularly for improvement or deterioration

• Continue supportive treatment and monitoring as required in all patients with severe malaria.


219

EDLIZ2020













"C
0
D
.>..
0

c
•.0..
0
.⁵...
..E..
•   ₂
5
0
£
..  E
w  >,
0  ...
it
-0d
dc
:::,
Cl)
0
t
<
"C
0
:::,

Cl)
c
0
0
0
....
0
0
5
r
0
0
0
0
0
Cl)
9                 cN
K                        cN
0
"C

2  0    .=
°0u..o.
2  3
r  0                    0
0   c                    --

c
:::,    ii
; o
2·-

w  Cl)
h  0
-
9
.£,
E .£

z
2  .0..

• ••
0   c                   Es
>                   z 3
0 ¢
0                      cu
<t                    Cl)  :::,
<  w                  E •o
I-                     N
U 0

z- l
o< ..   g

r  0
<  z
0w.  0w
W-z  0c
2-o
Jl
cc
0   ....           iC

EDLIZ2020




cNo
u      co

0
.c..

0•  0u
.¢
c
c•o ⁰
.c.u.

• 0o  o.«..t
0 ctu


0

5• 3 0...
u
0• o
...

f

o• c  o-
(u c)  cu
0 cu

tu cu  co
o
.•0..
0• o
...

v• to
...
co cu


...


0et ... u
,.-¢...

•  o0
0
"i' 0
00 cu
...

3• 5 o  u
�

.0a
ty

0  o• ¢  0
Lu
°00 (u  ...

h   e t 00  t
c
LJ   •
o 8  o

l
:c:
z
0
Lu
2
c
0
l
Lu
0
0  ,o-... t

• t 0
¢v 4  co  (")


t• o o
(d  uo  cy

.o..
-0a
0
t
o
f



0
u
';
,-...
o... ...

o
00
0
0  .t.y•.  o
0                 c

0z  ..•.  o
co .t.. 0

2

L>u
v
0   toy   cv
,;-... o

"i'  o
hz t
...   0

... ...
? 0...

Lu   u   0
::c:  V
I-
cᵗo co  co
¥          0         -  .,
LI   -  .,-     0
u p  -    "«'a- ::, -

0
::c:
£
·-es;  oE
E
::,
c   E
PE  -

EDLIZ2020
•  Administer artesunate injection slowly.

•   Intramuscular Injection volumes greater than 5mls should be spread over different injection sites.

OR
•   IN ADULTS administer Quinine intravenously:


Medicine quinine iv
Codes
C  V
Dose
20mg/kg (500ml
infusion)

10mg/kg
Frequency   Duration
loading  dose:  over 4 hours (do not exceed
1200mg)
dose 2: after 8hrs

• Intravenous Quinine loading dose of 20mg per kg body weight diluted in 500ml of Normal saline or 5% dextrose water infused over 4 hours. Do not exceed 1200mg of loading dose. After 8 hours subsequent doses should be administered at 10mg per Kg body weight diluted in Normal Saline or 5% dextrose water.

Additional Supportive measures for patients with severe malaria awaiting transfer:
• Maintain airway by appropriately positioning the patient in a left lateral position with the chin extended if patient is in a coma or convulsing.  Administer  oxygen  if  available.  Patients  with pulmonary oedema should be propped up and given IV diuretics.

• Give IV 25% dextrose water for hypoglycaemia in children as 1 ml 50% dextrose per kg body weight diluted 1: 1 with water for injection. This can also be given orally or via nasogastric lube if IV access is not readily secured. Continue to breastfeed where the child is still able to do so.

• Parenteral anti-emetics can be administered in adults with persistent vomiting.

• Address hyperpyrexia through physical means such as tepid sponging and fanning. Antipyretics such as Paracetamol may be given where appropriate.

• Treat convulsions with either intravenous or rectal diazepam where available.
A CLEAR LEGIBLE REFERRAL LETTER STATING THE DATE, NAME OF PATIENT, BRIEF HISTORY, DIAGNOSIS AND THE PRE-
222

EDLIZ2020
REFERRAL TREATMENT GIVEN SHOULD ACCOMPANY THE PATIENT TO THE NEXT LEVEL OF CARE. COMPLETE THE MALARIA REFERRAL FORM

If IV Artesunate is unavailable, IV Quinine is the alternative for patients with severe malaria.

TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA in children weighing less than 5kg.

Children less than 5kg should receive iv/im artesunate as first line treatment for severe malaria. Reconstitute the artesunate as per treatment guidelines. Children in this category will receive 3mg/kg body weight according to the dosing schedule below;

Treatment Schedule for iv and im artesunate for children less than 5kg

Intravenous(IV)          Intramuscular(IM)

mg         ml       mg      ml

<2.5kg      Calculate dose for each patient. Use 3mg/kg body weight
2.5kg-<4kg     10         1        10       0.5

4-<5kg       15          1.5       15       0.8


TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA in pregnant women

Pregnant women with severe malaria should receive iv/im artesunate as first line treatment for severe malaria. The dosage is 2.4mg/kg body weight. Use the dosing schedule in the severe malaria section (treatment at health facility)

General measures
• Coma: maintain airway, nurse on side, and exclude other causes of coma, 2 hourly turns.
• Convulsions: treat appropriately and check for hypoglycaemia.
• Hypoglycaemia: monitor blood glucose, correct with dextrose 50% 1ml/kg (diluted 1 to 1) in children, 20-50ml in adults followed by dextrose 10% infusion.

223

EDLIZ2020

• Severe anaemia: transfusion of packed cells if HB < 6g/dl.
• Acute pulmonary oedema: review fluid balance. Monitor infusion rates carefully. If over-hydrated give IV frusemide.
• Acute renal failure: exclude pre-renal causes, check fluid balance, dialyse early.
• Check carefully for meningitis - do a lumbar puncture if necessary.

TREATMENT OF SEVERE MALARIA AT COMMUNITY LEVEL

When a patient presents with signs and symptoms of severe malaria as a referral from the community health worker, he/she may have received rectal artesunate if they were unable to take any medication orally and time to get to the referral centre is more than 6 hours.

Medicine       Codes  Dose    Frequency  Duration
artesunate      C  V  see table suppositories PR       below


•   Rectal artesunate is given as follows:

The dose of rectal artesunate is 10mg per Kg Body weight.

Where the weight of the patient is not immediately known use the table below:


AGE
6 months-1 year
>1 -3 years
>3-5 years
>5-13 years
14-15 years
216 years
ARTESUNATE DOSE
50MG STAT
100MG STAT
200MG STAT
300MG STAT
400MG STAT
600MG STAT
ROUTE
Per Rectum Per Rectum Per Rectum Per Rectum Per Rectum Per Rectum

The weight ofpatients above 16yrs and all fully grown up adults has been assumed to be an average of 60kg. When artesunate is given according to known body weight do not exceed 1200mg.
• Do not give rectal artesunate to children weighing less than 5kg (less than 6 months).
■ Artesunate suppositories come in doses of 50mg, 100mg, 200mg and 400mg per suppository.


224

EDLIZ2020
•  To get to the required dose, 1 or more suppositories can be given in combination to get to the total dose required being considerate not to exceed three suppositories.
• If the suppository is expelled within 30 minutes, the dose should be repeated by insertion of another suppository.
•  In children the buttocks can be held together for ten minutes to ensure retention.
• Once the rectal artesunate has been given the patient is immediately referred to the nearest health centre for further management without further delay.

TREATMENT OF UNCOMPLICATED MALARIA IN ELIMINATION AREAS
In malaria elimination areas the appropriate treatment of uncomplicated malaria is

Medicine        Code  Dose    Frequency     Duration s
artemether/lumefantri  C  V  1.5mg/1 Dose 1: stat dose,   3 days nepo              2mg/kg Dose 2: after 8hours
Dose 3: after 12hours Dose 4 onwards: every 12 hours
primaquine po     C  V  0.25mg/  single dose
kg
Gametocyte clearance

WHO recommends a low dose primaquine to minimise the chances of clinically significant haemolysis where G6PD assay has not been done. The following patients should be given Primaquine 0.25 mg base/kg body weight with first dose of ACT for uncomplicated malaria:

• Above one year old
• Body weight above 10kg
• Not pregnant

Primaquine comes as 26.3 mg Primaquine phosphate equivalent to 15 mg and Primaquine base or 13.2 mg Primaquine phosphate equivalent to 7.5 mg Primaquine base tablets. The dosage tables below use the 15mg tablet as reference. Titrate the dosage based on the available strength of product;
Dilution instruction for primaquine tablet:
• Mix 15 ml water with one crushed tablet of 15 mg Primaquine base, making a suspension of 1 mg/ml.


225

EDLIZ2020
NOTE: DO NOT GIVE PRIMAQUINE TO THE FOLLOWING;
•  Patients with severe malaria (see Severe Malaria for definition)
•  Pregnant and breastfeeding patients
•  Known history of G6PD deficiency
•  Pallor or existing anaemia, haemoglobin < 8gm/dl
•  Patients on medications likely to cause haemolysis
•  Patients on medicines likely to cause bone marrow suppression
•  Patients taking Zidovudine or any medicines containing Zidovudine






































226

EDLIZ2020


14. RESPIRATORY CONDITIONS
ACUTE RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS IN ADULTS              228
OUTPATIENT MANAGEMENT                         228
IN.PATIENT MANAGEMENT                          229
EMPYEMA                                     231
HEALTHCARE ASSOCIATED INFECTIONS                 231
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE             231
BRONCHIESTASIS                                233
ASTHMA                                      234
ASTHMA IN CHILDREN                             238



































227

EDLIZ2020
ACUTE RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS IN ADULTS

Outpatient management
For acute respiratory infections in children see the paediatrics chapter.
Common cold, influenza and acute bronchitis ('cough')
No antibiotics are required. Treat symptomatically.
Other respiratory infections (Including pneumonia and other severe lower respiratory infections)
•  The approach to management may be influenced by the patient's HIV status. Always exclude TB and PCP. Loss of weight, productive cough for > 3 weeks, night sweats and a fever require TB screening i.e. sputum tests and/or CXR. Take a history of the duration of symptoms, sputum production (colour, haemoptysis and volume), constitutional symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, night sweats, and pyrexia. Ask for pleuritic chest pains.
•  If tuberculosis is unlikely and the patient's condition does not warrant admission, treat the infection with:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration

amoxlcillln po     C  V  1g stat, then 500mg
3 times a day
7 days+review (Return earlier if symptoms worsen)

or  If allergic to penicillin use: erythromycin po
C  V  500mg   4 times a day
7 days


•   If tuberculosis is likely arrange a sputum examination (2 sputum smear tests) and plan a review within one week.
On re-assessment, if there is no clinical improvement refer to district level. The three most common diagnosis are:
•  Pneumonia - non-responding segmental/lobar (See section on inpatient management)
•  Tuberculosis
Repeat sputum smear tests. Refer to the chapter on tuberculosis for treatment protocols.
•  Pneumocystis Pneumonia (PCP)
Patients are usually breathless, may be breathless only on exertion early in the illness, may be cyanosed; and may have negligible chest signs. The chest x-ray typically reveals bilateral fine perihilar mid- zone reticular-nodular infiltrates (ground grass). There may be cystic change. Frequently there are other signs of immuno- suppression.

228

EDLIZ2020
•  Manage with:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration cotrimoxazole po    C  V  1920mg  3 times a day 21 days
(4 tabs)
•  or in sulphonamide allergy:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration clindamycin po      B  V  600mg   3 times a day

and  primaquine po      C  V  15mg    once a day
•  If tachypnoea or cyanosis is present, add:
21 days
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration prednisolone po     B  V  40mg    twice a day  5 days
then  prednisolone po     B  V  40mg    once a day  5 days
then  prednisolone po     B  V  20mg    once a day  11 days
•  After PCP has been treated give cotrimoxazole prophylaxis and refer  to  the  01/ART  clinic.  If  there  is  sulphonamide  allergy, cotrimoxazole desensitization may be considered.

Medicine cotrimoxazole po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency C  V  960mg   once a day
< 6mths = 120mg
6-12mths = 240mg
>1 year = 480mg
Duration indefinitely
•  If no improvement occurs, consider malignancies such as, Kaposi's Sarcoma and consider referral to a Specialist.

In-patient management
Consider admission if patient is obviously unwell, or in severe pain. Admission and close monitoring are mandatory if any of these signs are present:
•  respiratory distress
•  cyanosis
•  pulse >124/min
•   hypotension (systolic pressure < 90mmHg)
•  temperature > 40C or < 35C
•  altered mental state
•  if elderly >65 years
•  if patient has chronic lung disease (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), chronic renal failure, chronic cardiac failure, chronic liver disease
•  Scoring for pneumonia severity (CURB-65) (the presence of any of the following merits admission)
•   C= confusion
•   U= urea greater than 7 mmol/L
229

EDLIZ2020
•   R= respiratory rate > or equal to 30
•  B = blood pressure less than 90/60
•  65= age of 65 or more
•  Always try to obtain sputum for MCS to establish the aetiological pathogen and its sensitivity to guide antibiotic treatment after empiric therapy.
Pneumonia - segmental/ lobar (usually pneumococcal)
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
benzylpenicillin iv or im C  V  1.5gm    6hourly    7 days
(=2.5MU)
or   ceftriaxone iv       C   v  1gm     daily   or  7 days
twice daily
+1.   erythromycin po     C  V  500mg    4 times a   7 days
day
A stat dose may be given at primary care level prior to transfer. Note: Switch to oral amoxicillin to complete the course
•  If no improvement within 48 hours, review diagnosis (consider tuberculosis or a complication of pneumonia e.g. lung abscess)
Pneumonia - Staphylococcal
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration cloxacillin iv       B  V  1-2gm    6hourly    14 days
or   clindamycin iv in     B  N  600mg    3-4 times a  14 days penicillin allergy                   day
"iv for at least 7 days, then consider changing to oral route
Pneumonia -- Klebsiella, other gram negative

Medicine         Codes  Adult dose
gentamlcln Iv       C  V  120mg
and  ceftriaxone iv       C  V  1gm

or based on culture and sensitivity.
Lung abscess
Frequency 12hourly
2 times a
day
Duration 10-14 days
10-14 days
• Postural drainage and physiotherapy are mandatory. Patients with very large abscesses should lie in the lateral decubitus position with the abscess side down, plus

Medicine benzylpenlcillin Iv
Codes
C  V
Adult dose 1.5gm
(=2.5MU)
Frequency 6hourly
Duration
4-8weeks°
and  metronidazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day  4-8weeks


Alternatively (alone)
Medicine
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid po

Codes Adult dose B  V  625mg

230

Frequency
3 times a
day

Duration

EDLIZ2020
continue until no longer toxic +/.7 days, then complete treatment as outpatient for 4-8 weeks with oral amoxicillin 500mg three times a day. Be on the lookout for C. difficile diarrhoea due to long course of antibiotics.  Repeat the CXR at 6 weeks.  If no significant resolution/response, refer to a Specialist to considerpossibility of MRSA (if patient was previously hospitalised), TB or other pathologies such as malignancy.

EMPYEMA
•   Institute pleural drainage with a large intercostal tube and underwater seal.
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzylpenicillin iv     C  V  2.5MU    6hourly    10-14 days
and  metronidazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day  10-14 days

Alternatively (alone)
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration amoxicillin-clavulanic   B  V  625mg   3 times a    10-14days
acid po                       day
Also institute thromboprophylaxis with heparin/warfarin (refer to Haematology section).
Note: Ifpus still drains after two weeks refer for surgical opinion.
•  If preceded by a suspected staphylococcal pneumonia use:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration cloxaclllin iv        B  V  1gm     6hourly    10-14 days
and  metronidazole po     C  V  400mg   3 times a day  10-14 days
•  In HIV infection, also consider TB empyema especially HEALTHCARE ASSOCIATED INFECTIONS (NOSOCOMIAL)
•  Pneumonia presenting 3 days after admission:

Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency
gentamicin iv        C  V  120mg    12hourly and  benzylpenlcillin Iv     C  V  1.5gm     6hourly
(=2.5MU)
Duration 7-10 days
7-10 days

OTHER COMMON RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
This tenm has replaced "chronic bronchitis and emphysema".
There are many aspects of management:

231

EDLIZ2020
•  All patients with a clinical diagnosis of COPD should have a spirometry  lung  function  testing.  This  is done  to assess for obstruction, assess the severity of the disease and to exclude asthma by demonstrating reversibility or non-reversibility of the obstruction.
• Stop smoking and/or remove from hazardous (dusty)environment.
• Prompt treatment of infective exacerbations (or as for pneumonia):

Treatment of COPD exacerbation
Give antibiotics if sputum colour has changed to purulent, fever or new chest Xray infiltrates.

Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
amoxicillin po       C  V  500mg   3 times a day 7 days
or   doxycycline po      C  V  100mg    once a day  7 days
•   For airway obstruction and dyspnoea add:
•   Mild /Moderate Disease and patient able to use inhaler {check technique):
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration salbutamol Inhaler    C  v 100-200mcg  6hourly   review

plus  lpratropium Inhaler    A  V 40mcg     6hourly   review
•  If dyspnoea is severe:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
salbutamol nebullsed  B  V  5mg     6hourty   review plus  lpratroplum nebulised  A  V  500mcg   6hourty   review and  prednisolone po     B  V  30mg    once a day 7 to 14days
• Preferably drive the nebuliser with air rather than oxygen.
•  Controlled oxygen therapy - 2 litres/minute by nasal prongs or 28% ventimask (Avoid higher concentrations of oxygen unless there is access to blood gas analyser). If it is possible to monitor oxygen saturation aim for SPO 88-92%
• Provide pulmonary rehabilitation to prevent respiratory muscle wasting and deconditioning.
• Provide nutritional support.
Management of stable COPD
•   Overall management of patients with stable COPD is individualised.
•   Use of bronchodilators
•    If the patient has mild symptoms and infrequent exacerbations (1 or nil per year) use:
232

EDLIZ2020
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration salbutamol Inhaler     C  V  200mcg   PRN
•   If no improvement add:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration ipratropium inhaler    A  V  400mcg   PRN
•   If  the  patient  has  frequent  to  persistent  symptoms  of breathlessness and frequent exacerbations (more than 1 per year) refer to a specialist whilst trying the following:

Medicine beclomethasone
plus inhaler
Codes Adult dose  Frequency
B  V  200mcg  twice a day
Duration PRN
salbutamol Inhaler    C  V  200mcg  PRN
•   Alternatively adding Theophylline SR 250-500mg PO once daily may be helpful if patients remain symptomatic.
•   Provide pulmonary rehabilitation
•   Provide nutritional support
•   Vaccinations: Influenza and pneumococcal vaccines
•   Enquire about symptoms of gastroeosophageal reflux disease (GERO) and treat.
Bronchiectasis (Non cystic fibrosis)
The hallmark of treatment are:
•  Prompt treatment of infective exacerbations with broad spectrum antibiotics. Exacerbations are characterized by an increase in volume of sputum, change in sputum colour from white to yellowish or green plus a fever.
•  Referral to physiotherapist for postural drainage and physiotherapy.
• Always send sputum to the laboratory for microscopy, culture and sensitivity together with ZN stain.
• To prevent exacerbations, patients should get an annual flu vaccine and a five yearly pneumococcal vaccine.
• Frank haemoptysis warrants referral to a Specialist.
Acute Exacerbations of Bronchiectasis
• Infectious aetiology includes S. pneumonia, H. influenza, P. aeruginosa, Moraxella, Mycobacteria and sometimes fungi.
• Antibiotics should be chosen to empirically cover pathogens. Adjust treatment when microbiology results are available.
• Inhaled bronchodilators
• Good hydration
• Chest physiotherapy and postural drainage


233

EDLIZ2020
• Persistent haemoptysis requires cardiothoracic surgeon's attention.
Long Term care for Bronchiectasis
• Improve lung function if patient has proven airway obstruction

Medicine salbutamol inhaler
+.  beclomethasone inhaler
Codes Adult dose
C    V  200mcg
B    V  200mcg
Frequency
PRN PRN
Duration

• Sputum clearance: nebulise with 0.9% Saline together with chest physiotherapy
• Pulmonary rehabilitation: inspiratory muscle training, improve exercise tolerance and endurance.

ASTHMA
General measures in Asthma
Asthma education should be viewed as a continuous process with regular re-enforcing during patient visits to the care giver. All patients should be treated with maintenance inhaled steroids unless the patient has mild intermittent asthma as evidenced by the odd chest tightness once in every 4 months or so. Any patient with asthma who requires hospital emergency treatment or admission should be prescribed an inhaled steroid for maintenance therapy.

Attention should be paid to the following:
• Domestic allergens e.g. house dust mite (carpets), cats, cockroaches
• Environmental aero-allergens
• Allergic rhinitis and sinusitis
• Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GERO)
• Emotional problems
• Smoking
• Work related dusts, fumes, vapours and gases

The aim of asthma management is total control of symptoms as indicated by:

•  Normal activities of life (work, school, sports)
•  Normal sleep with no waking up at night (i.e. no nocturnal cough)
•  Normal lung function
If the above are not achievable, partial control is second best. Uncontrolled asthma is not acceptable and warrants referral to a
Specialist
234

EDLIZ2020
Two aspects of the management of asthma in adults and children are considered here:
•  maintenance therapy;
•  treatment of acute attacks.
The management of asthma in children is similar to that in adults. However, children under 18 months may not respond well to bronchodilators. Details of asthma medicine treatment in children are given below.
Inhalers
• All patients with chronic asthma will require inhalers. Therefore, give careful advice and check inhalation technique. Technique can be improved in most asthmatics, particularly children, by a spacer device.
•  The device can be improvised as follows: cut a hole at the bottom of a 750 --1000ml plastic bottle and insert the open end of the inhaler to ensure a tight (snug) fit. Deliver one puff into the spacer and allow normal breathing for 30 seconds through the other end. All healthcare staff should be instructed in these techniques.
Asthma Score
•  The scoring system shown below can help to assess the severity of asthma. Peak flow meters, when available, must always be used to assess the progress. Antibiotics are indicated only if there is evidence of chest infection or a fever.
•  Partially controlled asthma:
•  Day time symptoms more than twice a week
•  Limitation of daily activities
•  Nocturnal symptoms
•  Peak expiratory flow/FEV1 less than 80% of predicted
•  Exacerbations >1 per year
•  Use of relieving medicines (e.g. salbutamol inhaler) more than twice per week
•  Uncontrolled asthma:
• Any 3 of the above features under partially controlled asthma

Mild Intermittent Asthma (symptoms once in 3 to 4 months)
Medicine        Codes   Adult dose   Frequency  Duration
salbutamol inhaler  C  V   100-200mcg  as  needed,  or  before
exercise





235



Mild Chronic Asthma Medicine beclomethasone inhaler
1 00mcglpuff
EDLIZ2020

Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration B  V 200-400mcg twice a day  continual
and salbutamol inhaler  C  v 100-200mcg as required  continual

Moderate Chronic Asthma
Medicine       Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
beclomethasone     B  V  200mcg   twice a day
inhaler
salbutamol inhaler   C  V  200m0g   as required
Severe Chronic Asthma
If response is still not adequate and the inhaler technique is adequate: Medicine        Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
beclomethasone     B  V  400mcg   2-4 times a  continual inhaler                   day

and  prednisolone po    B  V  25-10mg   once a
day
(morni
continual

and salbutamol inhaler   C V 100-200mcg  as required as
required

or   salmetero/fluticasone   S  E 50/250mg   once/twice a inhaler                   day
continual
+1-  theophylline slow    B  E  200mg    2-3 times a  continual release po                  day
using the lowest effective dose possible (prednisolone can also be
usefully given on an alternative day regimen of 10mg) Acute Asthma Attacks -- Adults
Acute asthma attacks are features of uncontrolled disease and are associated with mortality. Careful monitoring of the patient's condition is  essential  to assess  severity,  and  to detect improvement or deterioration. In the absence of blood gas facilities, this will depend on close assessment of physical signs such as paradoxical breathing, the use of accessory muscles, colour, altered mental state, etc.
1.  Assess the severity of asthma.
Take a careful history and examine the patient.
•  Observe breathing, talking and alertness, use of accessory muscles, colour, and mental status
•  Measure the pulse, respiratory rate,
•  Auscultation of the chest (assess wheezes). Measure lung function by peak flow or spirometer (PEF or FEV,) and arterial blood gases if available).
2.  Grade the asthma according to severity (mild, moderate, severe or imminent respiratory arrest)
3.  Use medicines and interventions that are appropriate to degree of severity.
236

EDLIZ2020
Humidified oxygen by mask at high concentration (6 litres/min) is important.


Give:

Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
salbutamol nebulised   8  V  5mg     repeat at ½ - 1 hr (in saline or sterile water}             intervals, then every 2-4   hours   until
recovered
+/  ipratropium inhaler   A  V  500mcg
and Oxygen           8  V  6 litres/min
or   adrenaline 1:1000 sc   C  V  0.5ml    1-2 hourly as required useful when no nebuliser available
and  prednisolone po     8  V  40mg    once a day  10-14
(mornings)  days
in all but the mildest cases
1.  Note: There is no need to taper the dose of prednisolone if the duration is not more than 14 days
2.  If poor response  to  initial  nebuliser therapy,  SpO, not improving, risk of near fatal asthma or attack severe admit to HOU/ICU and add:

Medicine hydrocortisone iv
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration C   V  200mg   once only

magnesium sulphate C
Iv
v  1.2-2g    slow iv over 20-
30minsonce
Consider ventilation in severe cases. Criteria for ICU admission:
•  Patient getting tired
•  Confusion, drowsiness
•  Rising pCO,>45mmHg
•  Persistent hypoxia < 60mmHg
•  Inability to complete short sentences
•  Acidosis
Consider the following management for very severe cases requiring ICU care:
• Continuous high flow oxygen.
• Nebulised salbutamol and ipratropium bromide.
• Intravenous Beta 2 agonist.
• Intravenous hydrocortisone or methylprednisolone.
• Possible intubation and mechanical ventilation.



237

EDLIZ2020
ASTHMA IN CHILDREN
Acute Attacks - Children
•  The same general measures apply as in adults. Give:

Medicine
salbutamol nebulised (in saline or sterile water)
- flow rate 6L/min
Codes
B  V
Paed dose Frequency  Duration
<5yrs =   repeat 2 times in the
2.5mg/2ml  first
>Syrs  = hour,
5mg/2ml  then every 4 hours
until recovered.

or  salbutamol inhaler through a spacer
C  V 100-200mcg as required (1-2 puffs)
Give oxygen between nebulisations.
•   If nebulisation facilities are not available, or response is poor:

Medicine
+1. adrenaline 1:1000 sc C

an prednlsolone po   B
d
Codes Paed dose Frequency  Duration
V 0.01ml/kg  may be repeated twice at
20 minute intervals
v 1-2mg/kg  once a day  3-5 days
Severe Acute Attack in Children
•   If response to the above is inadequate, give intravenous fluids at 80-
100 ml/kg/day, and:
Medicine       Codes  Paed dose   Frequency  Duratio n
hydrocortisone   C  V   4-8mg/kg  once only, then Iv/Im
2-4mg/kg    6 hourly   then: then prednisolone po   B  V   1-2mg/kg    once a day  5 days

•   Using an inhaler via a spacing device may be effective. A spacer can be improvised by using a plastic cup/ tumbler:

Medicine      Codes salbutamol Inhaler C  V

Maintenance Therapy
Paed dose    Frequency  Duration 200mcg-400mcg       as
required
1.  Do not keep children on long term beta-2 stimulant medicines (e.g. salbutamol) if they are mostly asymptomatic.
2.  Do not use antibiotics routinely in treating known asthmatics with wheeze.
The choice of medication depends on the frequency and severity of
symptoms, as well as the cost and availability of medication. Aerosol sprays in conjunction with a large volume spacing device can be effectively used in children as young as 3 years old.
238

EDLIZ2020
Mild asthma - children
Mild or intermittent asthma mainly associated with respiratory infections:

Medicine salbutamol inhaler
or  theophylline po
Codes  Paed dose  Frequency  Duration
C  V 100-200mcg  as required  intermittent B  E 5mg/kg   <4 times a day  intermittent
Moderate asthma - children
These may be triggered by infections, allergies, exercise etc. Treatment is for mild asthma, but continual therapy may be required. It may also be used in combination with theophylline.

Severe asthma - children
Severe, persistent asthma, persistent wheeze, and failure to respond to the above: add to the above
Medicine        Codes  Paeddose   Frequency    Duration
add  beclomethasone    B  V  50-100mcg   3-4 times a    continual inhaler                      day
or   prednisolone po°   B  V  1-2mg/kg    once in the    until
morning    control, then
reducing to the lowest, effective dose on alternate days
long term prednisolone should be avoided in children, unless there is no alternative.

























239

EDLIZ2020

15. CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE


MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE HYPERTENSION ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
ARRYTHMIAS AFTER MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION ENDORCARDITIS
RHEUMATIC FEVER










































240
241
245
249
250
252
254

EDLIZ2020
MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION
Non medicine treatment: All patients with hypertension or high normal blood pressure should be given advice on regular exercise, stopping smoking, reducing obesity and limiting intake of alcohol, salt and saturated fat.

Screening and diagnosis of hypertension: Screening programmes should be established to ensure that office BP is measured in all adults, at least every 5 years and more frequently in people with a high normal BP or risk factors for hypertension (such as strong family history, co-morbidities such as diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease). When hypertension is suspected the diagnosis of hypertension should be confirmed either by repeated office BP measurements.
The clinical assessment of a newly diagnosed hypertensive patient should establish the following:
• Establish diagnosis (repeated BP measurements) and classify/grade the severity of hypertension
• Assess for hypertension mediated organ damage/dysfunction
• Assess for existing cardiovascular disease/s, and co-morbidities
• Assess global cardiovascular risk
Classification of hypertension stages according to BP levels, presence of Cv risk factors, HMOD, or comorbidities
« tr

wet,
4  cted std fen,
1. 1.
Ar40  lo   rt


•
t        --
de.
.1%.
%.










(%de
e«
la .d
-- -- •••••
.    «        • ••     «

Principles of pharmacological management of hypertension
Monotherapy is usually inadequate therapy for most people with hypertension. Initial therapy with a combination of two drugs (at low to

241

EDLIZ2020
medium  range  doses)  should  now  be  considered  usual  care  for hypertension.
Exceptions: those patients with mild (Grade I) hypertension and no additional cardiovascular risk factors/comorbidities, or in some frailer old or very old patients, in whom more gentle reduction of BP may be desirable.
Note: Methyldopa and propranolol are no longer recommended for the treatment of hypertension except in special circumstances.
A  simplified  drug  treatment  algorithm:  A  combination  of  a thiazide/thiazide-like diuretic and calcium channel blocker is the preferred initial therapy for most patients. Other combinations: Calcium Channel Blocker  (CCB)  and ACEi/ARB  or thiazide/thiazide-like  diuretic  and ACEi/ARB are alternative first line combinations.
For those requiring three drugs, a combination of a thiazide-like diuretic with CCB and ACEi/ARB. Beta blockers should be used when there is a specific indication for their use, e.g. angina, post myocardial infarction, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, or when heart rate control is required.

Resistant hypertension: Identify resistant hypertension, defined as poorly controlled hypertension despite three drug combination therapy including a diuretic. Inadequate compliance and suboptimal dosing should always be considered and excluded.

GUIDELINES FOR TREATMENT OF HYPERTENSION:
■  start with first line medicine
■  start with the lowest recommended doses
■   if ineffective or not tolerated change the medicine or add a medicine from another class.

First line combination therapy
•  Thiazides/thiazide  like  diuretics  and  calcium channel blockers





and
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose hydrochlorothiazide po' C  V  12.5-25mg
(max 25mg)
amlodipine po       C  V  5-10mg
Frequency Duration once daily  long term

once daily  long-term

or   nifedipine slow release  C  V   20-40 mg  once daily  long-term po

'Unfavourable effect in patients with gout
■  Calcium channel blockers and ACE inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers:
242

EDLIZ2020
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration amlodipine po      C   V  5-10mg   once daily   long term

or   nifedipine slow release C   V  20-40mg  once daily   long term po
enalapril po       B   V  5-40mg   twice daily   long term
and
or   lisinopril po       B   V  5-10mg   once daily   long term

or   losartan po        B   V  25-100mg  once daily   long term


•  Thiazides/thiazide like diuretics and ACE inhibitors/angiotensin
receptor blockers:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose   Frequency  Duration hydrochlorothiazide po C   V  12.5-25mg  once a day   long term

enalapril po       B   V  5-20mg   twice daily   long term
and
or   lislnopril po        B   V  5-10mg    once daily   long term

or   losartan po       B   V  25-100mg  once daily   long term


Second line combination therapy
Thiazide/thiazide-like diuretics, calcium channel blockers and ACE
inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers:

Medicine
hydrochlorothiazide po
Codes  Adult dose  Frequency C  V  12.5-25mg once daily
Duration long term


and  amlodipine      po  B  V or  nifedipine slow release  B  V
po
5-10mg  once a day 20-40 mg  twice daily
long term long term

and  enalapril po or  lisinopril po
B  V  5-20mg B  V  5-10mg
twice daily twice daily
long term long term
or   losartan po       B  V  25-100mg  once daily   long term










243


Side effects profile Agent    Side effects
EDLIZ2020

Diuretics
e.g. HCT CCB


ACE
inhibitors
Unwanted side effects for diuretics include raised plasma glucose,  uric  acid,  cholesterol  and  reduced  plasma potassium and maanesium; sinus conaestion
Unwanted side effects include vasodilator effects such as headache and facial flushing in up to 20% of patients, peripheral oedema (usually due to a local action rather than an effect on the heart orkidney).
Unwanted side effects include cough in 10-25% of patients, angioedema, postural hypotension and occasionallysyncope, particularly in patients with a low plasma volume due to diuretic treatment. All ACE inhibitors can cause excessive hypotension and renal failure.
A useful alternative to ACE inhibitor when cough develops are Angiotensin-receptor blockers such as Losartan.
Caution: concomitant potassium supplements or potassium retaining medicines should be avoided, or used only with careful monitoring ofserum potassium.

Resistant hypertension
If BP remains above goal/poorly controlled, consider poor compliance, inadequate medicine doses (and optimize), drug-interactions (eg with NSAIDs, steroids, tricyclic antidepressants) and secondary causes of hypertension (esp renal, endocrine)
Refer patients with resistant hypertension for specialist care
The preferred fourth medicine is spironolactone, alternatives are beta blockers, alpha blockers, then other vasodilators such as oral hydralazine

•  Mineralocorticoid antagonist:

Medicine spironolactone po
Codes Adult dose
8  V 25-100mg
Frequency  Duration
1-2 times a long term day
Monitoring of potassium levels is recommended with spironolactone treatment

•  Beta-blockers
Medicine         Codes   Adult dose  Frequency  Duration atenolol po       B   V  50mg    once a day long term
Unwanted side effects include precipitation or exacerbation of asthma, heart failure, impaired glucose control, fatigue and peripheral vascular disease.




244

EDLIZ2020

•  Alpha-blockers:
Medicine     Codes    Adult dose Frequency   Duration
prazosin po    B  V    0.5-5mg   2-3times a day  long term

or  doxazocin po   B   V   4-16mg   once daily    long term
Total cardiovascular risk reduction
Those patients at high cardiovascular risk should be treated with a statin (for primary and secondary prevention), and anti-platelet therapy (for secondary prevention)
•  Statins:
Medicine       Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
atorvastatin po   B    V  20-80mg   once daily  long term

or  rosuvastatin po   B    V  10-40mg   once daily  long term

•  Anti-platelet agents:
Medicine        Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration aspirin po     B    V  75-150mg  once daily  long term

or  clopidogrel po   B     V  75 mg    once daily  long term

MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE HYPERTENSION
Definition: diastolic blood pressure >120mmHg
Emergency intravenous therapy or sublingual nifedipine is rarely required and is potentially dangerous (may result in stroke, renal failure or myocardial infarction).
Indications for emergency treatment:
■   Left ventricular failure with pulmonary oedema (also see section on treatment of acute pulmonary oedema).
Hypertensive encephalopathy.
•  Acute aortic dissection.
•  Severe pre-eclampsia (see chapter on Obstetrics & Gynaecology).
•   Recent stroke requires caution as rapid lowering of blood pressure may worsen neurological deficit. Treat if diastolic blood pressure
>120mmHg after 48 hours. Long term treatment indicated if diastolic blood pressure >100mmHg after 3 months.
•  Frequent blood pressure monitoring
•   Sub-lingual nifedipine should be restricted in its use for hypertension. The only remaining major indication for it is severe hypertension with aortic dissection.
245

EDLIZ2020
Medicines
Beta-blocker, with alpha activity:

Medicine labetalol iv
Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
S  V  20 mg IVt stat over 2 mins, then 10-80 mg IVI every ten minutes until desired BP level achieved
labetalol  continuous  S  V  ..2 mg IVI per minute by continuous IV Infusion               infusion
··Total dose should not exceed 300 mg
•  Calcium channel blocker:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration

nlcardlplne      iv
(nicardipine continuous
infusion)
S  V  Initial infusion rate 3-5 mg/hour Reassess every 10-30 minutes and transition to oral treatment once emergency stabilized
The maximum infusion rate is 1.6 mcg/kg/min. The initial infusion rate of intravenous nicardipine is 5 mg/h. The maximum infusion rate is 30 mg/h, it is advisable not to exceed 15 mg/h.
■  Direct acting vasodilator:

Medicine dihydralazine iv/im
Codes Adult dose
8  V 6.25-25mg
Frequency  Duration
PRN until desired BP level achieved
BP should be measured every 5-10 minutes
Parenteral anti-hypertensives should be used under specialist supervision and where facilities for continuous BP monitoring are available

CARDIAC FAILURE
Usually presents with shortness ofbreath on exertion orat rest, swelling of ankles, ascites and easy fatiguability.

General guidelines:
■  Precipitating factors should be sought and treated e.g.:
• hypertension
• infections such as sub-acute bacterial endocarditis, chest infection
• arrhythmias
• hypokalaemia
• anaemia
• medicines, e.g. digoxin overdose, NSAID's, beta-blockers
• pulmonary embolism
• thyrotoxicosis
• myocardial infarction


246

EDLIZ2020
•  Daily weights and fluid balance (intake/output) should be recorded as a simple measure of response to treatment. Ideal weight loss should be 1kg per day.
•  Restrict salt in diet.
•  Encourage bed rest.
•  Check blood pressure daily.
•  Potassium supplements are to be stopped and levels monitored regularly when using ACE inhibitors (e.g. captopril and enalapril).
•  Monitor serum potassium levels.
•  Digoxln toxicity may be a problem especially in the elderly and in patients with hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia.

Medicine Management:
The medical management of heart failure discussed below is evidence based for heart failure with reduced left ventricular systolic function.
Heart failure in the setting of valvular heart disease requires surgical management as the definitive treatment, some of the medications below can be used to control symptoms of congestion or heart rate control




and
and or
Medicine frusemlde po' enalapril po carvedilol    po
bisoprolol po
Codes Adult dose BV  40-80mg BV  5-20mg BV 3.125-25mg
BV 1.25-10mg
Frequency  Duration 1-2 times a dayMong term once daily  long term
twice   daily long  term once daily    long term


or  metoprolol succlnate
XL po?
BV 25-100mg  1-2times/day  long term


and  spironolactone po     BV  25-50mg   once daily   long term
+l-   potassium chloride po'  B V 600mg-1.2g 1-2 times a day long term
+1.   digoxin po         B E  0.25-0.5mg  3times a day  first 24hrs then 0.125-0.25mg once a day   long term Paed = 0.01mg/kg
'give intravenous treatment for severely oedematous patients control release metoprolol
if using ACE inhibitors, losartan or spironolactone discontinue or use
cautiously
ACE inhibitors are of benefit in all stages of heart failure
Selective Beta blockers such as carvedilol are of benefit in all stages of heart failure
For oedematous and bed-ridden patients:


247

EDLIZ 2020
Medicine       Codes     Adult dose  Frequency  Duration enoxaparin sc    B  V     40-80mg   once daily   as required
or   heparin sc      B  V     5000 units  3 times a day as required

Acute pulmonary oedema:
■  Prop up in bed.
■  40% oxygen by mask (2- 4L/min) and:

Medicine morphine iv
Codes
B E
Adult dose 5-10mg
Frequency  Duration slowly over 1-2 mins; Repeat every 15mins if
required.
plus   metoclopramide iv   B E     10mg     when required for
vomiting
plus   frusemide iv      B V     40-80mg   repeat as required
•  Subsequent treatment includes ACE inhibitors as for heart failure.
ANGINA PECTORIS
Change in lifestyle measures. Minimise risk factors with particular attention to:
•  cessation of smoking;
•  weight reduction if obese;
•  control of hypertension.
•  control of hypercholesterolaemia
•  control of diabetes
•  encouragement of exercise
•  minimise stressful lifestyle
Stable angina/ Infrequent attacks:
Medicine         Codes   Adult dose   Frequency  Duration aspirin po        C  V   75-150mg   once a day  long term
and  glyceryl trinitrate sub- A  E   500mcg    not more than 3 tablets lingual°                       every 15 mins
and  atorvastatin po      B  V   20-80mg   once daily  long term

or   rosuvastatin po     B  V   10-40mg   once daily  Long term
'aspirin is contraindicated in bleeding peptic ulcers
2glyceryl trinitrate deteriorates on storage - tablets should be kept in original container and discarded 3 months after opening.
Frequent attacks of angina:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
aspirin po        C   V  75-150mg once daily   long term and  isosorbide dinitrate po A   E  10-40mg  3 times a day  long term
•  If no response, add:
248

EDLIZ 2020
Medicine         Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
atenolol po        B  V  50-100mg   once a day  long term and  amlodipine po       B  V  2.5-10 mg  once daily  long term


or   nifedipine slow release  B  V  10-20mg po
twice daily  long term

•  If pain continues in spite of above treatment,  refer for further investigation and treatment.
Unstable Angina:
Angina of new onset or brought on by minimum exertion. Admit to hospital for:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
aspirin po        C   V  75-150mg  once daiy  long term and  isosorbide dinitrate po A   E  10-40mg  3 times a day as required or   glyceryl trinitrate iv   A   E  10-20mcg /min infusion   as required and  heparin iv         B   V  5000iu    6hourly    as required and  atenolol po        B   V  25-100mg  once daiy  as required and  nifedipine slow release B   V  10-20mg   twice a day  as required
po
or   amlodipine po      B   V  2.5-10 mg  once daily  as required and  atorvastatln po      B   V  20-80mg   once daily  long term

or   rosuvastatln po     B   V  10-40mg   once daily  long term

ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION

General Measures
Bed rest
Oxygen administration
■  Set up an intravenous line (dextrose 5% or sodium chloride 0.9%)
Give aspirin at the earliest possible opportunity
Where possible, avoid intramuscular injections as this interferes with the measurement of cardiac enzymes and results in haematomas with thrombolytic agents.









249

EDLIZ 2020
Management of Acute Myocardial Infarction:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
aspirin po         C   V  300mg   once only as a single dose, then
75-150mg once a day   long term or   clopidogrel po      B  E  300mg   once only
75mg   once daily
and  morphine iv        B   E  2-5mg   every 10--   as required
15min
and  isosorbide dinitrate po A   E  10-40mg  3 times a day  as required and  low  molecular
weight heparins
and  streptokinase     (or A  N  1.5MU in 100ml sodium chloride 0.9% preferably urokinase) iv      or dextrose 5% run over one hour,
Useful for Ml with ST     once only segment elevation
and  atenolol po         B   V  50-100mg once a day   long term and  enalapril po        B   E  5-20mg   twice daily   long term or   lisinopril po        B   E  5-20mg   twice daily   long term and  atorvastatln po      B   V  20-80mg  once daily    long term

or   rosuvastatin po     B  V  10-40mg  once daily   long term
• Thrombolytic agents should be administered early preferably in infarcts of less than 12 hours duration.
• CAUTIONS: DO not give digoxin in acute infarction unless there is
a supra-ventricular arrhythmia that requires ii.
• DO not use inotropic agents such as isoprenaline or adrenaline as they may be counter-productive and cause an extension of the infarction.

ARRHYTHMIAS AFTER MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION:
Ectopic beats
Give reassurance about the condition, but if troublesome:
Medicine        Codes    Adult dose  Frequency  Duration atenolol po      B  V    50-100mg  once daily   as required

Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter
Medicine        Codes    Adult dose Frequency   Duration atenolol po     B   V     25-50mg  once to twice review
a day
or   verapamil po    A   v    40-120mg 3 times a day  review

Verapamil is contraindicated in heart failure patients.

250

EDLIZ 2020
If poor control of ventricular response, cautiously add:
Medicine         Codes   Adult     Frequency  Duration dose
digoxin po        B  v   0.25-     3 times a   first 24hrs
0.5mg   day
then   0.125-0.25mg once a   long term day


For chronic atrial fibrillation:
Medicine warfarin po

Codes Adult dose Frequency  Duration
B  V  10mg    once a day for 3 days then adjust according to INR
For atrial flutter, synchronised D.C. cardioversion (50-200 joules) can be tried.
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
Carotid sinus massage/valsalva manoeuvre or prompt squatting.
Consider synchronized D.C. cardioversion (50-200 joules) if patient distressed.


Medicine verapamll Iv

For long term therapy:
Codes Adult dose
A  V  5-10mg
Frequency  Duration
bolus, can be repeated after 10 min
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency    Duration verapamil po       A  V  40-120mg  3 limes a day  long term
Caution: avoid intravenous verapamil in patients treated with beta-
blockers.
If poor response, refer for specialist management.
Ventricular tachycardia
•  Consider D.C. cardioversion if patient distressed.

Medicine llgnocalne Iv

Medicine amiodarone iv





Codes
A E
Codes Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
B  N  75-100mg  stat,  then 4mg/min for 30 mins, then 1-2mg/min for 12-24 hours
Adult dose  Frequency  Duration
150 mg over first 30 min (5mg/min), followed by 360 mg over next 6 hr ( 1 mg/min),
THEN 540 mg over remaining 18 hr (0.5 mg/min),
Maintenance: 0.5 mg/min for a total 720 mg/24hr
•  In general, maintenance with amiodarone infusion should be limited to 24 hours or less, unless if the patient cannot tolerate oral medication, or the tachyarrthymia is recurrent.
251

EDLIZ 2020
•  The same regimen should also be used for refractory atrial fibrillation or SVT
•  If ventricular arrhythmias are troublesome disopyramide (specialist- only) may be used -- refer.
HIGH DEGREE AND SYMPTOMATIC HEART BLOCK (STOKES ADAMS ATTACK) REFER TO SPECIALIST FOR PACEMAKER INSERTION.



ENDOCARDITIS
Consult a microbiologist where possible. Alpha-haemolytic streptococci are the most common causes of native valve endocarditis, but Staphylococcus aureus is more likely if the disease is rapidly progressive with high fever, or is related to a prosthetic valve (Staphylococcus epidermidis). Three sets of blood cultures should be taken before starting treatment.
Native valve endocarditis
Empirical treatment:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Freq.     Duration benzylpeniclllln Iv    C  V  5MU     6hourly    2-6 weeks
or   ceftriaxone 1g iv     C  V  1g      12hourly   2-6 weeks
and  gentamlcln iv      C  V  80-120mg   12hourly   2 weeks

Total duration of antibiotic therapy should be 4-6 weeks if there is evidence of improvement.
Treatment can be changed to oral therapy after at least 2 weeks of IV antibiotics if there is marked improvement.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis Initially:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose  Freq.    Duration
cloxacillin iv        B  V  2g      6hourly    4-6 weeks and  gentamicin iv      C  V  80-120mg  12hourly   4 weeks
It is important to measure serum gentamicin levels every 3-4 days. One- hour peak concentration should not exceed  10mgll and trough concentration (2hour pre-dose) should be less than 2mgll.
Treatment of culture positive endocarditis
Streptococcal infection (e.g. Strep. viridans):



and
Medicine benzylpenicillin iv gentamicin iv
Codes
C V
C V
Adult dose
5MU
80-120mg
Frequency Duration 6hourly  4-6 weeks
12hourly  4 weeks


252

EDLIZ2020
Enterococcal infection (e.g. Enterococcus faecalis):
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzylpenicillin iv      C  V  5MU     6hourty   4-6 weeks
and  gentamicin iv        C  V  80-120mg  12hourly   4 weeks
max-120mg

Staphylococcal infection (for example, Staph. aureus & Staph. epidermidis):




and
Medicine cloxacillin iv gentamicin iv
Codes
B V
C V
Adult dose 2g
80-120mg
Frequency 6hourty 12hourly
Duration 4-6 weeks
4 weeks
At any stage, treatment may have to be modified according to:
• detailed antibiotic sensitivity tests
• adverse reactions
• allergy
• failure of response
Endocarditis leading to significant cardiac failure or the failure to respond to antibiotics may well require cardiac surgery.
Prophylaxis against endocarditis -- no special risk:
Dental procedures, upper respiratory tract, obstetrics and gynaecological procedures under local or no anaesthesia (no special risk):
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration amoxicillin po      C   V  3g      one dose only - one hour
Paed = 50mg/kg before procedure

or  clindamycin  po  in B
V  600mg
one dose only,

penicillin allergy or recent penicillin  administration (< one month)
<5yrs = 150mg  one hour before 5-10yrs = 300mg  procedure
Dental procedures, upper respiratory tract, obstetrics and gynaecological procedures under general anaesthesia (no special risk):
Medicine           Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration ampicillin iv        B  E   1g at induction, then 500mg after 6hrs
or  amoxicillin po      C  V   3g 4hrs before anaesthesia, then 1g 6
hours post-op.
If penicillin allergy or recent administration of penicillin within the previous month see under special risk groups below.
Prophylaxis against endocarditis -- special risk:
Prosthetic valve in situ, or previous endocarditis or genitourinary procedures (special risk groups)


253

EDLIZ 2020
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration ampicillin iv        B  E  1g      at induction  single dose
and  gentamicin iv       C  V  120mg    at induction  single dose
If penicillin allergy or administration of penicillin in the past month:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration clindamycin iv     B  N  300mg    at induction  single dose
and  gentamlcln Iv       c  V  120mg    at induction  single dose
Do not use clindamycin for urologicaVgynaecological procedures because it will not prevententerococcal infection. In these cases replace clindamycin with vancomycin iv 1g over at least 100 minutes 1-2 hours before procedure.

RHEUMATIC FEVER
Treatment of acute attack:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose    Frequency  Duration benzathine penicillin   c V  0.6MU(0.72g)
Im

1.44g = 1.2MU
once dose
Paed: <5 yrs =0.15MU(0.18g) only  single
5-10 yrs= 0.3MU(0.36g)        dose
>10 yrs=0.6MU( 0. 72g)


or   amoxycillin po      C  V      500mg
Paed: <5 yrs=125mg
5-10 yrs=250mg
>10 yrs=500mg

3 limes a day


10 days

or   erythromycln po - in penicillin allergy
c V  500mg
4 limes a day
10 days
Treatment of acute arthritis and carditis:
Medicine         Codes  Adult dose Frequency   Duration
aspirin po         c  V  25mg/kg  4 times a day  as required
dose should be reduced if tinnitus or other toxic symptoms develop.
Aspirin should be continued until fever, all signs of joint inflammation and the ESR have returned to normal, and then tapered gradually over 2 weeks. If symptoms recur, full doses should be restarted.
In severe carditis with development of increasing heart failure or failure of response to aspirin, add:
Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration prednisolone po      B V 1-2mg/kg   once a day  34   weeks,
then review
Gradual reduction and discontinuation of prednisolone may be started after 3-4 weeks when there has been a substantial reduction in clinical disease.

254

EDLIZ 2020
Heart failure should be managed in the usual way.
All patients with carditis should be kept on strict bed rest until all evidence of active carditis has resolved and the ESR has returned to normal. Activity can then be gradually increased.

Antibiotic prophylaxis after rheumatic fever:

•   Prophylaxis should be given to all patients with a history of rheumatic fever and to those with heart valve lesions thought to be of rheumatic origin. The optimum duration of prophylaxis is controversial but should be continued up to at least 21 years of age. If at that age there are any significant heart murmurs, prophylaxis should be life-long.
•   Specific situations requiring prophylaxis for longer periods (can be lifelong):
definite carditis in previous attacks
■  high risk of exposure to streptococcal infection at home or work (crowded conditions, high exposure to children)


Medicine          Codes  Adult dose  Frequency  Duration benzathine penicillin Im C  V  2.4MU(1.44g
(1.44g =2.4MU)             <12yrs =   monthly  up  to  21-
1.2MU(0.72g)         30yrs
or   amoxlclllln po       C  V   250mg     once a day  lifelong

or   erythromycin po in    C  V   250mg  2 times a day up  to  21-30yrs penicillin allergy       <12yr=125-250mg
Note
The need for continuing prophylaxis should be reviewed at 21-30 years and patients with rheumatic heart disease must take prophylaxis life long.
















255
